---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 28, 2025
title: RUTHLESS MEN SEEK MY LIFE
occasion: Holy Innocents
readings:
  - Jer. 31:15-17
  - Ps. 54
  - Rev. 14:1-5
  - Matt. 2:13-18
sermon_text: Ps. 54
bible_version: ESV
---

# RUTHLESS MEN SEEK MY LIFE

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We pray, gracious Father, for Your Spirit to testify of life in Your Son, especially in our darkest hour. In Jesus' name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, King Herod was a ruthless man. In today's Holy Gospel, the angel of the Lord warns Joseph about Herod: **"Rise, take the Child and His mother, and flee to Egypt, and remain there until I tell you, for Herod is about to search for the Child, to destroy Him"**  (Matt. 2:13b).

King Herod is one of those people in the Bible about whom there is a lot recorded outside of the Bible — a significant amount of history has been recorded not only about Herod but about his family. In the history books, this Herod is known as Herod the Great, whose father was Antipater. Herod's father, Antipater, supported the Roman invasion of Judea in 63 B.C. The name of the Roman general who invaded Judea at that time was Pompey. There was a huge regional conflict going on, and Pompey saw an opportunity to snatch up more territory to the south for the Roman Empire, so he did, with Antipater's support. At this point Antipater's family had gained the political favor of the Roman Empire. And, again, Antipater was the father of Herod the Great. Herod's family was involved in wars and conquering territory.

We also have for our psalm today Psalm 54, whose first verse is **"O God, save me by Your name, and vindicate me by Your might."**  But this psalm has the bonus feature of the first verse also sharing background information. This information is
> **To the choirmaster: with stringed instruments. A Maskil of David, when the Ziphites went and told Saul, "Is not David hiding among us?"**

*Maskil* appears to have to do with wisdom, so this is a psalm to be sung that teaches us wisdom. Furthermore, we are also told the occasion for the writing of this psalm: David is being chased by Saul, who is jealous of David and wants to kill him. Saul is a ruthless man who seeks David's life. Let's go straight to the story that involves the Ziphites, since it is given to us. It is found in 1 Samuel, chapter 23.
> **David saw that Saul had come out to seek his life. David was in the wilderness of Ziph at Horesh. And Jonathan, Saul's son, rose and went to David at Horesh, and strengthened his hand in God. And he said to him, "Do not fear, for the hand of Saul my father shall not find you. You shall be king over Israel, and I shall be next to you. Saul my father also knows this." And the two of them made a covenant before the LORD. David remained at Horesh, and Jonathan went home. Then the Ziphites went up to Saul at Gibeah, saying, "Is not David hiding among us in the strongholds at Horesh, on the hill of Hachilah, which is south of Jeshimon?"**  (1 Sam. 23:15–19)

It is, of course, remarkable how much Jonanthan and David loved each other — Jonathan being King Saul's own son. But Jonathan recognizes his father's wickedness and remains David's faithful friend. Nevertheless the Ziphites probably fear Saul — maybe they think Saul is wonderful, I don't know — and they report to Saul that David is hiding in their territory.
> **"Now come down, O king, according to all your heart's desire to come down, and our part shall be to surrender \[David] into the king's hand." And Saul said, "May you be blessed by the LORD, for you have had compassion on me. Go, make yet more sure. Know and see the place where \[David's] foot is, and who has seen him there, for it is told me that he is very cunning. See therefore and take note of all the lurking places where he hides, and come back to me with sure information. Then I will go with you. And if he is in the land, I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah." And they arose and went to Ziph ahead of Saul.**  (1 Sam. 23:20–24a)

*\[Ask]*  Do you remember how this one turned out? David moved on to a mountain but Saul followed him there.
> **Saul went on one side of the mountain, and David and his men on the other side of the mountain. And David was hurrying to get away from Saul. As Saul and his men were closing in on David and his men to capture them, a messenger came to Saul, saying, "Hurry and come, for the Philistines have made a raid against the land." So Saul returned from pursuing after David and went against the Philistines. Therefore that place was called the Rock of Escape.**  (1 Sam. 23:26–28)

The Lord used the Philistines to save David. This is what was going on for David to write Psalm 54.
> **O God, save me by your name, and vindicate me by your might. O God, hear my prayer; give ear to the words of my mouth. For strangers have risen against me; RUTHLESS MEN SEEK MY LIFE; they do not set God before themselves.**

And these ruthless men who do not set God before themselves are no other than Saul and his men. Saul's name is a huge word of warning to all of us, for he was anointed by God to be the first king of Israel. It is written in 1 Samuel, chapter 10,
> **Then Samuel took a flask of oil and poured it on \[Saul's] head and kissed him and said, "Has not the LORD anointed you to be prince over his people Israel? And you shall reign over the people of the LORD and you will save them from the hand of their surrounding enemies. And this shall be the sign to you that the LORD has anointed you to be prince over his heritage. When you depart from me today, you will meet two men** ***by Rachel's tomb*** **in the territory of Benjamin at Zelzah."**  (1 Sam. 10:1–2a)

At the mention of Rachel's tomb we are brought to our Old Testament prophecy of Jeremiah which marks the location the slaughter of the Holy Innocents. Saul was there, too. Back in Genesis, Rachel had died giving birth to Benjamin and she was buried on the way to Bethlehem (Gen. 35:19). But Bethlehem also marks the place where Saul met two men who directed him to a couple of other places until finally, at the hill of God, Samuel tells Saul,
> **You will meet a group of prophets coming down from the high place with harp, tambourine, flute, and lyre before them, prophesying. Then the Spirit of the LORD will rush upon you, \[Saul,] and you will prophesy with them and be turned into another man.**  (1 Sam. 10:5b–6)

How can Saul, at one time full of the Holy Spirit and prophesying, now be a ruthless man without God before him? Read the Bible and find out. In short, God said one thing but Saul thought he knew better. The Spirit left Saul and he became a ruthless man who wanted to kill David.

Now as for Herod we are never told if he was filled with the Spirit at any point. What history books say is that in 37 B.C. Herod was nominated by the Roman senate to be king of Judea. In order to gain favor with the Jews he divorced his wife to marry Mariamne, a woman from a priestly Jewish family. This is the Herod who ordered the slaughter of the male infants in Bethlehem.
> **Then Herod, when he saw that he had been tricked by the wise men, became furious, and he sent and killed all the male children in Bethlehem and in all that region who were two years old or under, according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise men. Then was fulfilled what was spoken by the prophet Jeremiah: "A voice was heard in Ramah, weeping and loud lamentation, Rachel weeping for her children; she refused to be comforted, because they are no more."**  (Matt. 2:16–18)

And so, from the joyous birth of the Christ Child, announced by the angels, from the wise men of the east bringing gold, frankincense, and myrrh, we move quickly to the slaughter of children and the bitter mourning of their mothers — horror! Scripture that comes to mind is **"From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violent take it by force"**  (Matt. 11:12). The pendulum has swung. Ruthless Herod has taken action.

Why? In our Old Testament reading the "Why?" for Israel is not difficult to answer. God had told them directly to love and worship Him only. But Israel refused. Their hearts turned away from God, and, like Saul, they would not listen. They worshiped other gods. And for their idolatry, for their sin, they received and suffered a consequence of seventy years of slavery in Babylon.

In the Holy Gospel the "Why?" for Bethlehem is because their ruler, Herod, feared losing the power of his throne, and he was furious that the wise men had seemingly tricked him when he had instructed them to return to him with a report.

At other times there is no clear answer for the "Why?" — no Word from God on why something happened, or a clear cause and effect that we could easily point to. All we know — all we can say for sure — is that we sinners live in a world of sin, suffering, pain, evil, and death. Even our Lord says, **"In the world, you will have tribulation"**  (John 16:33).

*\[Transition]* But, belovèd in the Lord, even with the death of the Holy Innocents at the hands of ruthless men, let this be heard: God is determined not to let His people's lives end in death. **"For God so loved the world, that He gave His only Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish** ***but have eternal life*"**  (John 3:16). He has given us His Son. The Son of God set all who believe in Him on the course of life, and we trust that the babies killed by Herod had the Spirit of Jesus like John the Baptist did in his mother's womb (Luke 1:15). With Jesus there is only life, and we can never stop rejoicing at His birth.

And the joy of the feast of the Holy Innocents is that nothing can deter — not even Herod — nothing can stop Jesus from accomplishing His goal. Herod the Great tried. He tried to kill Jesus, but **"and angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said, 'Rise, take the Child and His mother, and flee to Egypt, and remain there until I tell you.' "**  Herod the Great will die, but then his son, Herod Antipas, will seek to kill Jesus, too. Christ's reply to Herod Antipas is written in Luke, chapter 13:
> **Go and tell that fox, "Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I finish my course. Nevertheless, I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the day following, for it cannot be that a prophet should perish away from Jerusalem."**  (Luke 13:32–33)

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Parts of this sermon are taken from *Concordia Pulpit Resources*, Vol. 36, Part 1, pp. 60–63.