---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 23, 2025
title: BUT LOVE YOUR ENEMIES AND EXPECT NOTHING IN RETURN
occasion: 7th Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Gen. 45:3-15
  - 1 Cor. 15:21-26, 30-42
  - Luke 6:27-38
sermon_text: Luke 6:27-38
bible_version: ESV
---

# BUT LOVE YOUR ENEMIES AND EXPECT NOTHING IN RETURN

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, it may be our most distinguishing characteristic: we Christians deal with our enemies differently. Say "I am a Christian" and the world knows, and is watching, that we love our enemies and turn the other cheek. The world knows about today's Holy Gospel and is watching to see if we truly live according to Christ's Word. It is a powerful witness when we love our enemies.

And so, in the name of Christ, let us hear again that which He teaches us to do:
* **Love your enemies.**
* **Do good to those who hate you.**

Has our Lord told us to do this, or is this advice for advanced Christians? Are all Christians held to this teaching? Yes or No? We have the text before us: there is no suggestion whatsoever that this is mere advice. It is our Lord's command. They will know we are Christians by our love for our enemies.

We continue with our Lord's teaching from today's Holy Gospel, *\[Sermon on the Mount]*  the Sermon on the Plain.
* **Bless those who curse you.**
* **Pray for those who abuse you.**

Hold on here. To be abused by someone else, whether by their hands or by their lips, is terrible–it should never be. But, take note, our heavenly Father does allow it to happen–Christ's commands here *assume* it will happen, God forbid, to at least some of us. The Bible teaches us that God does takes vengeance on our behalf (Rom. 12:19; Deut. 32:35)–it is not for us to seek revenge against those who hurt us. … But doesn't the Lord realize the world we live in? Belovèd in the Lord, He knows *exactly* the world we live in.

*\[Transition]*  And we have been given Joseph in our Old Testament lesson, whose own brothers abused him. Let us turn to Joseph and bring to remembrance what we learn about our Lord Jesus from him. Joseph's brothers were jealous of him, for Joseph was Dad's favorite. The Bible tells us, **"Israel loved Joseph more than any other of his sons, because he was the son of his old age"**  (Gen. 37:3). These jealous brothers threw Joseph into a pit and then sold him to slave traders who then sold him to Potiphar, the captain of Pharaoh's guard (Gen. 39:1).

We have in our Old Testament lesson Joseph now face-to-face with those same brothers who had abused him. He is face-to-face with Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah (from whom Christ is to be born)—he is face-to-face with Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, and Zebulun. These brothers fear revenge from Joseph, but what does Joseph say to them? Hear this:
> **I am your brother, Joseph, whom you sold into Egypt. And now do not be distressed or angry with yourselves because you sold me here,**  **for God sent me before you** ***to preserve life*.**  (Gen. 45:4b–5)

Joseph is not angry. Joseph is not nursing a grudge. Instead, Joseph is kind toward his brothers. May the Spirit help us to never forget that Joseph sees that it is God's good and gracious will *to keep his brothers alive*. He sees that God's plan is better than revenge: God's plan is that Joseph lives, his brothers live—God's plan is that *everyone* lives. God's plan is *to preserve life*, and we are part of His plan. God planned to have mercy on Joseph's cruel brothers to keep them alive, *even if it meant that Joseph would be abused by them*. By the grace of the Spirit Joseph sees God's plan to show mercy and he sees that *he's part of God's plan* to show mercy.

Belovèd in the Lord, do you see that Joseph is a picture of Christ? God is always planning to show mercy in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ, and we're part of God's plan, too. We are Christians.

*\[Transition]*  Now, returning to the Sermon on the Plain, our Lord continues to teach us.
* **To one who strikes you on the cheek, offer the other also.**

There it is. The world is waiting to see this one. Conflicts could never escalate—wars could never begin where Christ's Word is believed and practiced. We are to seek no payback for ourselves. We are to seek no payback for ourselves and even take it one step further: turn the other check and let him hit you another time. How can this be? Perhaps we can discuss this subject at more length in Bible study, but we are also commanded to love our neighbor. If an abusive person is a threat to others, it may be that the Lord has raised us up to put a dangerous person in his place. But if it's personal, let them hurt us. They can try, but we have Jesus. *\[Pray]*  Lord, grant us wisdom to do what you tell us and to love and defend our neighbor. We know also that when, in God's wisdom, we turn the other cheek, we leave all vengeance to God—He will handle our enemies in His own way.

*\[Transition]*  To better understand what Christ is teaching us we must look to the Cross and remember what we heard from Joseph. As Christ teaches, He knows what's coming—He knows He's heading up to Jerusalem to be mocked, scourged, and *\[Crucifixion]*  crucified bearing our sins. Behind His teaching stands not a strong opinion, not an attempt to appear wise to gain a following. Though Christ's Words are pure wisdom, what stands behind His teaching is that He is the true God who is about to reveal His pure sacrificial for us at the Cross.

For on the Cross will our Lord not pray, **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do"** ? (Luke 23:34a) He could call for revenge on those who crucify Him. But instead, **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do."**

Christ's body will be abused and will He not also be mocked?
> **The people stood by, watching, but the rulers scoffed at Him, saying, "He saved others; let Him save Himself, if He is the Christ of God, his Chosen One!" The soldiers also mocked Him, coming up and offering Him sour wine and saying, "If you are the King of the Jews, save Yourself!"**  (Luke 23:35–37)

Belovèd in the Lord, Christ will not hang on the Cross to save Himself. He will hang to save the soldiers who mock Him. He will hang on the Cross foremost to save the sons and daughters of Abraham who cry out, **"Crucify Him!"**  (Mark 15:13). *He will hang on the Cross to keep us alive*. Our lives are in danger because of the sin we inherit from Adam.
For **sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin** (Rom. 5:12a). We are born ready to sin and sin we do—*\[point to cemetery]*  and die we do, receiving our wages (Rom. 6:23a). But thanks be to God, *\[Crucifixion]*  Christ *will hang on the Cross to keep us alive*—He has already done it!—He has kept us alive by winning for us our forgiveness. His death is our punishment so we get to live. His death, He knows, means *we get to live*. His mocking, He knows, means we get to be honored as children of God. *\[Resurrection]*  His Resurrection, He knows, is just around the corner for Him—but He has already done it!—He lives and you and I get to live forever by faith in His name. Alleluia!

And so, belovèd in the Lord,
> **I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish,** ***in order that I may gain Christ and be found in Him*, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which comes through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith—that I may know Him and the power of his Resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, that by any means possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead.**  (Phil. 3:8–11)

If we only hold on to Christ, belovèd in the Lord, we are happy. When we love our enemies we lose nothing and give honor to our Lord who loved us while we were still sinners (Rom. 5:8). It is an honor to do the same for our enemies.

*\[Conclusion]*  Finally, we are also taught to lend and expect nothing in return.
* **From one who takes away your cloak do not withhold your tunic either.**
* **Give to everyone who begs from you, and from one who takes away your goods do not demand them back.**

For we, too, have come to Jesus, begging for forgiveness, and He forgave us.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Today is the commemoration of Polycarp.

Joseph is a type of Christ–suffering unjustly at the hands of those he saves. We have a view into God's heart that all along He wanted to have mercy on those brothers who hated Joseph.