---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 9, 2025
title: DO NOT BE AFRAID; FROM NOW ON YOU WILL BE CATCHING MEN.
occasion: 5th Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Is. 6:1-13
  - 1 Cor. 14:12b-20
  - Luke 5:1-11
sermon_text: Luke 5:1-11
bible_version: ESV
---

# DO NOT BE AFRAID; FROM NOW ON YOU WILL BE CATCHING MEN.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Lord Jesus, to rejoice in Your Word that directs us to work. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, here's something with which you may be familiar. You've been working hard and finally you get a break—you finally get that well-deserved break. *\[Relaxing sound]*  "Ah!" You turn around and who do you see? Someone who needs you to forget about that break and get up and do something more. This does not always go over well—this can even lead to hard feelings. *\[Irritated]*  "Don't you understand I'm taking a break? Go and bug someone else."

Now there is all kinds of work that can get us tired—we can work hard at a lot of things, but I want to focus for today on what we might all call "backbreaking work"–work that can tear up your body. *\[Illustration]*  I have a recollection of backbreaking work from when I was a kid—not that I was doing the work—I thought back then that raking leaves was backbreaking work—but when it comes to *real* backbreaking work I remember reading somewhere that farmers in Asia work bent-over all day in rice paddies. That, I imagined as a kid, was backbreaking work. Now as a pastor, over the years, having visited many who need a hand, I have learned that nursing and caretaking is backbreaking work. But being a fisherman in Bible times, I am sure, is also backbreaking work, which brings us to
* Peter & Andrew
* James & John

two pairs of brothers, four of the apostles, who are known to have been fishermen—who make their living doing backbreaking work.

*\[Begin transition]*  Since fishermen get special recognition in the Bible, I would like to mention to you that this influenced the ambitions I held for my children. I wanted Aadu and Jaan to be brother fishermen like James and John. When Aadu was two and Jaan was a baby, I took them to a commercial fishing dock to watch a trawler unload its catch of red snapper; it happens to be one of Aadu's earliest childhood memories.

*\[Transition]*  But in our Holy Gospel, Peter, James, and John are not so fortunate: they have fished all night and have caught nothing at all. These men are not like Irene and me fishing off the rocks and catching a goby every two years. These apostles are professional fishermen—they know what they're doing, but this night they have caught nothing.

They've worked hard, caught nothing, and now it's time to wash the nets and put them away. *\[Aside]*  Now you know every once in a while filmmakers take artistic license when they write screenplays for Bible movies. I will now do the same. These apostles do backbreaking work, and I would like to add that fishermen, and others that do such work, might be inclined to use coarse, direct language, especially when they're tired from working all night and have nothing to show for their work. Does not the prophet Isaiah support this point in our Old Testament lesson? **"Woe is me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips"**  (Is. 6:5a).

They've worked hard and caught nothing while Christ, on shore, has a crowd pressing in on Him to hear the Word of God. This crowd, no doubt, is also well aware that Jesus is able to heal anyone who is sick who is brought to Him; He also casts out demons who cry out loud to Him, **"You are the Son of God!"**  (Luke 4:41) Quite simply, the crowd cannot get enough of Jesus and they press in on Him just as Peter, James, and John are wrapping it up for the night. They are worn out. But Jesus is getting real popular, real fast. He turns to Peter and says, "Peter, I need you to get back in the boat with Me."

"Listen, Miracle Man, I've been up all night and it's time to go home. Better make it quick." (And this, I imagine, is a toned-down version of what a tired fisherman would really say.)

Our Lord Jesus climbs in Simon Peter's boat, they put out a bit from shore, and now Christ teaches the people from the boat. What He actually teaches is likely what we will hear in next week's Holy Gospel from Luke, chapter 6. What He teaches, though, is the Word of God for He *is* God—how wonderful that God Himself is teaching man. What precious Words for us to hear!

*\[Transition]*  But now come the Words for Peter to hear: **"Put out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch."**  And Simon Peter answers,
> **Master, we toiled all night and took nothing!**  ***But at your word I will let down the nets.***

At this point, belovèd in the Lord, Scripture teaches *us* in a most beautiful way. This moment is precious to our faith in Jesus—this moment will come to our aid today and tomorrow. We have Peter, ready to go home—Peter, perhaps tired and irritated—Peter doing something right for a change. He's tired … *but now is the best time to listen to Jesus*. By the grace of the Spirit, Peter overcomes his fatigue *to nevertheless trust Christ at His Word*. This, belovèd in the Lord, is wonderful for us to keep in our hearts: *without the Word of Christ, we catch nothing. When His Word comes, get up and do it.*

Belovèd in the Lord, there is not a single one of us who has nothing to do, and Scripture bears that point. **"For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them"**  (Eph. 2:10). That is, Peter's God-given job is put out into the deep and let down his nets as Christ has told Him; Christ is the One who fills the nets, and He fills them to the point of breaking! Again, the next time we're weary, we pray that the Spirit open our ears because Christ's Word comes to us with abundant blessing! Open our ears, Holy Spirit, that we hear Christ's Word and believe it and *do it*!

And when we have believed His Word and done it, let us remember and quickly confess the sinful words that bubbled up in our hearts and nearly jumped off our tongues to defile us. **"When Simon Peter saw \[all those fish], he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, 'Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.' "**

Having confessed our sin to Jesus we acknowledge just as fast that His forgiveness is not an *Aw shucks, it's okay*. His forgiveness is even beyond backbreaking work, *\[Crucifixion]*  though His body *is* broken. Christ’s forgiveness, first of all, is God's own forgiveness. His forgiveness, second of all, requires Him to suffer on our behalf to fulfill God's justice against our sin: He bears the penalty our sins deserve and dies so that we are truly forgiven—there is no claim that Satan can make against us—we are truly forgiven and we have escaped all condemnation. Christ's forgiveness, on His part, is not only to suffer but specifically to bear His Father's anger—to drink the cup of His Father's wrath against our sin. Who is our heavenly Father angry at? Any idolater, the Bible is clear. The Father's jealous anger is borne by His Son who willingly, without complaint, obediently bears all our misery for us and *\[Cross]*  *wins* our forgiveness. Thank you, Lord Jesus, for Your precious, hard-fought forgiveness! And thank you, merciful Father, for sending us Jesus, Your Son!

Belovèd in the Lord, at this point of comfort and certainty that all our sins are forgiven, that all our iniquity is pardoned by the work of Christ, *let us feel our burden lifted*. What has been forgiven by God need not be brought up anymore. We may be tired—we may have spent all day cleaning up after somebody—our body may be aching. But an unbeliever with an aching body is different from a believer in Jesus with an aching body: "At least I *know* my sins are forgiven." And it's easier to go on.

And, belovèd in the Lord, here's something more to rejoice in. Our Holy Gospel teaches us not only that the best time to listen to Jesus is when we're tired, but that when we listen to His Word and get up and do one more little thing, get ready for our nets to be filled to the point of breaking. In other words, get ready for more work! At the point we're ready for a break, get ready for more work! Thank God there are partners in the other fishing boat to help Peter drag the nets to shore, and thank God we're the body of Christ and have each other to count on. Christ will make sure the fish get hauled in.

*\[Conclusion]*  The fish that Christ especially seeks are men, for He does say, **"DO NOT BE AFRAID; FROM NOW ON YOU WILL BE CATCHING MEN."**  The work Christ most desires is that all men be saved (1 Tim. 2:4). Belovèd in the Lord, we never need be afraid of "gender-exclusive language," for our Lord Jesus uses it all the time; this time to include *everyone*. We can only rejoice in the language He uses because He's teaching us to live in His kingdom. **"DO NOT BE AFRAID; FROM NOW ON YOU WILL BE CATCHING MEN"**  is simply the way Christ chooses to express that He is here to save man*kind*—every man, woman, and child.

So, belovèd in the Lord, expect more work, even we're tired. And expect plenty of help to bring all the people to shore. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes