---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 8, 2026
title: HE HAS DISTRIBUTED FREELY; HE HAS GIVEN TO THE POOR.
occasion: 5th Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Is. 58:3-9
  - Ps. 112
  - 1 Cor. 2:1-16
  - Matt. 5:13-20
sermon_text: Ps. 112
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE HAS DISTRIBUTED FREELY; HE HAS GIVEN TO THE POOR.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us gracious Father, to not only believe in Your Son, but also to walk in those good works, which You have prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them. In Jesus' name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, though today's sermon text is the Psalm, I do not want to let the Epistle go unnoticed, for it cannot go unnoticed. It is written in 1 Corinthians, chapter 2, **"I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and Him crucified"**  (1 Cor. 2:2). This is St. Paul saying that the Cross of Christ is it — there is nothing else to know, which is quite a statement. It's just one verse, but quite a verse.

The reason why I do not want to let 1 Corinthians 2:2 go unnoticed is the issue of how do we interpret the Bible — how do we go about teaching and confessing what God says? *\[It's a shame Art is not here — he's well-versed on this subject.]*  If you interpret the Bible one way you're saying, "God says this." If you interpret the Bible the other way you're saying, "God says that." And what do you suppose has happened ever since God breathed out His Scriptures (2 Tim. 3:16)? One person claims, "God says that" while the other asserts, "No, God says this." They may agree to disagree. They may debate each other to try to win the other to his side. One may even call the other a heretic, a false teacher — it happens all the time.

Is there even such a thing as a false teacher? Remember the temptation of Christ.
> **\[The devil] said to \[Jesus], "If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, 'He will command His angels concerning you,' and 'On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.' " Jesus said to him, "Again it is written, 'You shall not put the Lord your God to the test.' "**  (Matt. 4:6–7)

The devil is a false teacher of Psalm 91 while our Lord corrects him from Deuteronomy 6. Our Lord Jesus is the True Teacher *\[Sermon on the Mount]*  and we have a window for that. So yes, there is such a thing as a false teacher and the devil will raise up may more. For our Lord Himself warns us, **"False christs and false prophets will arise and perform great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect"**  (Matt. 24:24). We, on the other hand, have been given the Holy Spirit *\[font]*  with our Baptism to help us properly interpret what the devil would twist.

All that being laid out, at the root of the issue is how do we interpret the Bible? And for that matter, how do we interpret anything that claims to be sacred writing? This issue, if we think about it, appears to be *the* issue that has driven all of history.

Now introducing the subject like that sounds like an intro to a college lecture, and there are many students and professors who do engage in these questions day and night — you can even make a living researching, discussing, and debating these issues. And when we are exposed to these circles, there is a word that I invite you to learn because you may hear it at some point: the word is *hermeneutics*. There, doesn't that sound smart? The dictionary defines *hermeneutics* as *the study of the methodological principles of interpretation (as of the Bible)*  . In other words, what method do we use to interpret the Bible? How do we approach interpreting Scripture?

Well, you could do it one way and you could do the other. Yet how does our Lord Jesus Christ interpret Scripture? He tells us in today's Holy Gospel:
> **Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them but to fulfill them. For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished.**  (Matt. 5:17–18)

Christ says that the Bible is about Him (John 5:39) — He has come to *fulfill*, not abolish, what the Old Testament prophets have prophesied by the Holy Spirit. Well, we have an approach, then — do we not? — we have a way to interpret the Bible. Take note! — this is *Christ's* way to interpret the Bible. The Old Testament was written to prophesy about His coming. The New Testament was written to testify that He came and fulfilled those prophecies. St. Paul simply puts it more succinctly: **"I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and Him crucified."**  The Old Testament prophets testified that *\[Crucifixion]*  Christ would be crucified bearing our sins, and *He did it* (Ps. 22:31), as prophesied in the last verse of Psalm 22.

Yet we have denominations — it is no news to anyone that there's a Roman Catholic Church, a Baptist Church, an Orthodox Church, a Lutheran Church, and countless others. Christ never intended these splits, for our Lord Himself prayed on Maundy Thursday,
> **I do not ask for these only, but also for those who will believe in Me through their word,**  ***that they may all be one*, just as You, Father, are in Me, and I in You, that they also may be in Us, so that the world may believe that You have sent Me.**  (John 17:20–21)

Though Christ never intended it — He prayed that we all be one — but here we are and we're not! Why? Much of it is simply that one person claims, "God says that" while the other asserts, "No, God says this." May the Holy Spirit bless us to properly interpret the Scriptures that we all be one.

I will give you but one example from the Reformation. Luther had asserted from the Bible that we are saved by faith in Christ alone based on this Scripture, among others. It is written in Ephesians, chapter 2,
> **For by grace you have been saved through faith. And this is not your own doing; it is the gift of God, not a result of works, so that no one may boast.**  (Eph. 2:8–9)

The pope disagreed with Luther's interetation and threw him out of the Roman Church.

How do we interpret Psalm 112? **"HE HAS DISTRIBUTED FREELY; HE HAS GIVEN TO THE POOR."**
* Should we do good?
* Or should we follow Jesus?

**"For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them"**  (Eph. 2:10).

We were impoverished before God because of our sin.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes