---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 22, 2024
title: WHEN ELIZABETH HEARD THE GREETING OF MARY
occasion: 4th Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - Mi. 5:2-5a
  - Heb. 10:5-10
  - Luke 1:39-56
sermon_text: Luke 1:39-56
bible_version: ESV
---

# WHEN ELIZABETH HEARD THE GREETING OF MARY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Fill us, we pray, Lord Jesus, with Christmas joy. May we hold you in our hearts as Savior, as did both Elizabeth and Mary. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, there are truly many moments—many wonderful moments—of the Christmas story; how blessèd are we to rehearse them as often as we do. I say *rehearse*, not *remember*, because these moments come to us from God's living Word. The Christmas story is our life. For it is written, **"The Word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints and of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart"**  (Heb. 4:12).

We have to think hard to remember anything negative about the Christmas story. *\[Ask]*  Can you think of anything? The angel Gabriel announcing to Mary that she would conceive and bear the Son of God (Luke 2:26–33) is not negative: it's positive. Gabriel again announcing to Zechariah that he and Elizabeth would have a son (Luke 1:11–14) is not negative: it's positive, too. The Bible does say that Elizabeth and Zechariah were both advanced in years (Luke 1:7), but I'm a senior citizen now; that's not negative: it's positive.

But I have found a negative: it is recorded in Luke, chapter 1:
> **The angel said to \[Zechariah], "Do not be afraid, Zechariah, for your prayer has been heard, and your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John. And you will have joy and gladness, and many will rejoice at his birth, for he will be great before the Lord. And he must not drink wine or strong drink,**  ***and he will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb*. And he will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord their God, and he will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared."**  (Luke 1:13–17)

Nothing negative there yet: it's positive. But next,
> **Zechariah said to the angel, "How shall I know this? For I am an old man, and my wife is advanced in years." And the angel answered him, "I am Gabriel. I stand in the presence of God, and I was sent to speak to you and to bring you this good news. And behold, you will be silent and unable to speak until the day that these things take place,**  ***because you did not believe my words*, which will be fulfilled in their time."**  (Luke 1:18–20)


We have again with Zechariah the lingering problem of doubt—doubting what God has said. Yes, you may remember that this started early, way back in the Garden of Eden. **"Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die"**  (Gen. 2:17). This Word of the Lord was doubted too, and with tragic effect for all of us. Zechariah's unbelief is a negative, and for this, the LORD mercifully disciplines him and turns off his voice, to remind him that it would have been better had he believed Gabriel's announcement.

And while we're on the negative, I'd like to take the opportunity to pile on one more negative because the positives are so powerful. I'll bring up one more negative, and this is the big one. The child that is born to Zechariah and Elizabeth is John the Baptist. If we are to stay close to the Bible, we are not celebrating *one* conception but *two*: the conception of our Lord Jesus Christ, of course, *and* the conception of his second cousin, John the Baptist. John is the one, as we just heard, who is **filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb**. That is not negative, either. Yes, we have a mini-Pentecost to celebrate, as we will soon hear again—the pouring out of the Holy Spirit.

But John, when he is finally born, will be a preacher and a baptizer to prepare the way of the Lord. We cannot forget that John's preaching will be a preaching of *repentance*—the wonderful turning away from sin over which heaven rejoices. We bring to our remembrance John's preaching from two weeks ago:
> **You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bear fruits in keeping with repentance. And do not begin to say to yourselves, "We have Abraham as our father." For I tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham. Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.**  (Luke 3:7b–9)

John will be born to preach this sermon that we are to heed. John's preaching of repentance is abhorrent to our flesh—I would say that an allergic reaction is an apt analogy. But our flesh—our sin inherited from Adam—our ancient sin which formed when God was not believed in the Garden of Eden—is simply no good. And if we harden our hearts against the preaching of John–if we choose *not* to turn away from the sin we love to repeat—if, God forbid, we refuse to bear the fruits in keeping with repentance, *there really is nothing positive about Christmas*—there's no Savior and no point. We're idolaters and we're not going to welcome a new Lord into our hearts.

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, by the grace of the Spirit, *not so with us*. Come, Lord Jesus! We've listened to John and we've turned from our sins and we've asked God for help. Jesus is our Help and we celebrate His conception, and the conception of John the Baptist. (I won't jump ahead to these boys being born—that's for Tuesday night.)

Christ has been conceived in Mary's womb, and, the Bible tells us, John has been conceived in Elizabeth's womb six months prior. Elizabeth, an old woman, and Mary, a young woman, are both pregnant; each with her first child. *And* they're cousins! Think of that! It does seem that family communications are active so that Mary thinks it's a good idea to go visit her cousin since they're both expecting. They can both talk about being pregnant together. "Hello, cousin Elizabeth!"
> ***When Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary*, the baby leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit, and she exclaimed with a loud cry, "Blessèd are you among women, and blessèd is the fruit of your womb! And why is this granted to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For behold, when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy. And blessèd is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord."**

**WHEN ELIZABETH HEARD THE GREETING OF MARY**—if we were there, I believe we would all agree that this is a wonderful moment—just one of the many wonderful moments of the Christmas story yet still a wonderful moment beyond measure. *\[Christmas window]*  We are not even yet at Bethlehem; the manger is still months away. John leaps in his mother's womb and is filled with the Holy Spirit, just as Gabriel has prophesied. Not only is John filled with the Spirit but so is Mom, and she prophesies,
> **"Blessèd are you\[, Mary,] among women, and blessèd is the fruit of your womb! And why is this granted to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me?"**

Note that Jesus, the baby in Mary's womb is Elizabeth's Lord, and Elizabeth knows it. Having turned from our sins and by the grace of the same Spirit of Jesus, may we always know the same. **"There is salvation in no one else, for there is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved"**  (Acts 4:12). *\[Crucifixion]*  Yes, there is the Cross that Jesus will bear for us, to shed His blood and win for us our salvation, the forgiveness of our sins.

And Elizabeth continues,
> **For behold, when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy. And blessèd is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord.**

At this wonderful moment of two rejoicing mothers, the older praises the younger for faith—for believing **that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord** by the mouth of Gabriel. For Mary has done far better than Zechariah. Mary's mouth is *not* closed, and she responds, **"My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior."**  For the holy Child in her womb is even her Savior. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Elizabeth means "God her oath."

John means "YHWH is Gracious" or "YHWH is Merciful."

Micah 5:5a
\[5] And he shall be their peace.

Hebrews 10:5–7
\[5] Consequently, when Christ came into the world, he said,
“Sacrifices and offerings you have not desired,
but *a body* have you prepared for me;
\[6] in burnt offerings and sin offerings
you have taken no pleasure.
\[7] Then I said, ‘Behold, I have come to do your will, O God,
as it is written of me in the scroll of the book.’” (ESV)

Psalm 40:6–8
\[6] In sacrifice and offering you have not delighted,
but you have given me an *open ear*.
Burnt offering and sin offering
you have not required.
\[7] Then I said, “Behold, I have come;
in the scroll of the book it is written of me:
\[8] I delight to do your will, O my God;
your law is within my heart.” (ESV)

There is so little about the Christmas story that is negative—that is, not until Herod puts to death the Holy Innocents in Bethlehem (Matt. 2:16–18).