---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: July 20, 2025
title: MARY SAT AT THE LORD'S FEET AND LISTENED TO HIS TEACHING.
occasion: 6th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Gen. 18:1-14
  - Col. 1:21-29
  - Luke 10:38-42
sermon_text: Luke 10:38-42
bible_version: ESV
---

# MARY SAT AT THE LORD'S FEET AND LISTENED TO HIS TEACHING.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us Lord, with Your Spirit to not be distracted, but to pay rapt attention to You. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, from where did you get your great ideas when you were a kid? "Mom, Bobby says that if you eat glue it won't hurt you—as long as you let it dry first."

Mom says, "If Bobby told you to jump in a fire, would you do it?" She is saying, "Why should you listen to Bobby?" But, truth be told, there is something about Bobby that makes me want to listen to him. If this example rings a bell for you as it does for me, I picture Bobby as a peer who is interesting and exciting so that I want to be like him—more alive—one who is thought to be interesting and exciting, like Bobby. I want to live, don't I?

That was childhood, but now we're adults. To take another example, senior citizens are not the only ones enticed by phrases like "the money you deserve" or "the money you have coming to you." Hang up that that phone, already! I better not listen to her—she may be a scammer. Yet the way she speaks makes me picture myself being better off—more alive—with a financial windfall. I want to live, don't I?

Here is another negative example. There is something about taking street drugs that makes us feel more alive. Still, I better not listen to that man who says, "You may want to try this—you'll like it"—he may be a drug dealer. Yet the way he speaks makes me picture myself experiencing something wonderful or having some relief—being more alive—taking that drug. I want to live, don't I?

Now these days we have social media, filled with *influencers* to listen to, and millions of us follow them. Up to this point I've been bringing up negative examples, but influencers on social media are not all bad. I'd like to share with you one positive example: Iron Wolf. I follow Iron Wolf on YouTube. (He has 206K followers.) *\[Ask]*  Does anyone know who Iron Wolf is? He's a U.S. Marine who posts his burpee workouts on YouTube. He doesn't show part of the workout—he doesn't simply tell me *about* burpees—he *shows* himself doing all 700-or-so burpees and inviting me to do it along *with him*. Even though I cannot keep up with Iron Wolf, I do listen to him and have found that burpees are good exercise and that this exercise does make me more alive. I do want to live, don't I?

*\[Transition]*  And so, with this positive example, we turn to today's Holy Gospel—we turn to Martha with her service to other people. Christ has arrived at the house of Martha and Mary. (This must also be the home of Lazarus, but Lazarus is not mentioned here.) Wherever Christ shows up, there are likely many following Him. It may be that dozens of people have shown up at the house, following Christ. And, by the way, He truly is the one to listen to if I want to live. But who is going to accommodate all these people at the house? Our Holy Gospel tells us,
> **Martha was distracted with much serving. And she went up to \[Jesus] and said, "Lord, do you not care that my sister has left me to serve alone? Tell her then to help me."**

Martha's request is reasonable, for, after all, many hands make for light work and it is written that **"two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their toil"**  (Eccl. 4:9). But our text today does say that Martha is *distracted*. *Distracted* means that her attention has been turned away from something she should be paying attention to, even if she's taking care of other people. Our text is very clear: it is Martha's sister *Mary* who, with everyone milling around, is paying attention to *exactly what she should and needs to pay attention to*. **"MARY,"** it is written, **"SAT AT THE LORD'S FEET AND LISTENED TO HIS TEACHING."**

What, then, is our Lord Jesus teaching, as Mary is seated at His feet listening, that is so important? In passages like this one that do not specify Jesus' teaching, I assume that Jesus is teaching by parables or is teaching like He does in the Sermon on the Mount, in Matthew, chapters 5–7, or in the Sermon on the Plain, in Luke, chapter 6. Mary may have heard Jesus say,
> **No good tree bears bad fruit, nor again does a bad tree bear good fruit, for each tree is known by its own fruit. For figs are not gathered from thornbushes, nor are grapes picked from a bramble bush. The good person out of the good treasure of his heart produces good, and the evil person out of his evil treasure produces evil, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.**  (Luke 6:43–45)

Hearing this, if I were Mary, I would confess my sin and pray, or even sing exactly as we do liturgy:
> **Create in me a clean heart, O God,** 
> **and renew a right spirit within me.** 
> **Cast me not away from Thy presence;** 
> **and take not Thy Holy Spirit from me.** 
> **Restore unto me the joy of Thy salvation;** 
> **and uphold me with Thy free spirit. Amen.**  (Ps. 51:10–12)

Having prayed this, I might hear Christ say,
> **God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through Him. Whoever believes in Him is** ***not condemned*, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because He has not believed in the name of the only Son of God.**  (John 3:17–18)

"Yes, Lord Jesus, I believe in You. By faith in You I am not condemned for my sin. Thank You, Lord Jesus."

Belovèd in the Lord, is this not far more important than serving people? And here we are clearly taught to believe in Jesus *first*, and listen to Him closely; *then* loving others will follow. Good works follow faith; not the other way around. Does not this faith in Jesus give me life? This is the very life I have always wanted. And does not the apostle Peter declare,
> **Lord, to whom shall we go? You have the words of** ***eternal*** **life.**  (John 6:68)?

Belovèd in the Lord, Christ, of course, is not just *talking* about eternal life and salvation: He is headed to Jerusalem *\[Crucifixion]*  to *show* it, to *fulfill* it, to *win* it for all who but believe that He bears our sins on the Cross.

And, finally, does not the apostle Paul declare,
> **Whatever gain I had, I counted as loss for the sake of Christ. Indeed, I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things and count them as rubbish, in order that I may gain Christ and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own that comes from the law, but that which comes through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith—that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death, that by any means possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead.**  (Phil. 3:7–11)

With Jesus, I can do nothing *but* live. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Genesis 18:9–10
\[9] They said to him, “Where is Sarah your wife?” And he said, “She is in the tent.” \[10] The LORD said, “I will surely return to you about this time next year, and Sarah your wife shall have a son.” And Sarah was listening at the tent door behind him. (ESV)

Genesis 18:14
\[14] **Is anything too hard for the LORD?**  At the appointed time I will return to you, about this time next year, and Sarah shall have a son.” (ESV)

Genesis 18:16–18
\[16] Then the men set out from there, and they looked down toward Sodom. And Abraham went with them to set them on their way. \[17] The LORD said, “Shall I hide from Abraham what I am about to do, \[18] seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? (ESV)

Genesis 18:20–22
\[20] Then the LORD said, “Because the outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah is great and their sin is very grave, \[21] I will go down to see whether they have done altogether according to the outcry that has come to me. And if not, I will know.”
\[22] So the men turned from there and went toward Sodom, but Abraham still stood before the LORD. (ESV)

Genesis 19:1–2
\[1] The two angels came to Sodom in the evening, and Lot was sitting in the gate of Sodom. When Lot saw them, he rose to meet them and bowed himself with his face to the earth \[2] and said, “My lords, please turn aside to your servant’s house and spend the night and wash your feet. Then you may rise up early and go on your way.” They said, “No; we will spend the night in the town square.” (ESV)

Deuteronomy 32:39
\[39] “‘See now that I, even I, am he,
and there is no god beside me;
I kill and I make alive;
I wound and I heal;
and there is none that can deliver out of my hand. (ESV)

John 8:51–53
\[51] Truly, truly, I say to you, if anyone keeps my word, he will never see death.” \[52] The Jews said to him, “Now we know that you have a demon! Abraham died, as did the prophets, yet you say, ‘If anyone keeps my word, he will never taste death.’ \[53] Are you greater than our father Abraham, who died? And the prophets died! Who do you make yourself out to be?” (ESV)

Colossians 1:22
\[22] he has now reconciled in his body of flesh by his death, in order to present you holy and blameless and above reproach before him, (ESV)

Jesus needed His flesh in order to die.

The Sermon Hymn is LSB 536 One Thing's Needful

And then there are those who are "always right." Do we do well to listen to them? It depends. If they *think* they're always right, they may be the most dangerous of all.