---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: August 10, 2025
title: FEAR NOT, LITTLE FLOCK
occasion: 9th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Gen. 15:1-6
  - Heb. 11:1-16
  - Luke 12:22-40
sermon_text: Luke 12:22-40
bible_version: ESV
---

# FEAR NOT, LITTLE FLOCK

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Thank you, Lord Jesus, for taking perfect care of us. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, when we come before the Lord Jesus, we bring to our remembrance first and foremost *\[altar]*  the new testament in His blood for the forgiveness of our sins. But even when we're not at church we constantly come before Him—we come before Him in our thoughts and especially our *prayers*. *Pray all day* is what St. Paul invites us to do (1 Thess. 5:17). *Bother the Father* is what our Lord invites us to do with the example of the nagging widow (Luke 18:2–5). And when we come before the Lord, quite often, what's on our mind are those times that have been difficult for us—tough times are often on our mind, and who hasn't had tough times?

When we bring up those tough times, whom do we remember? We may be blessed with a happy memory of a particular person who was there who let us know "It's okay." *\[Illustration]*  When I was a kid in summer camp and I woke up in the middle of the night, afraid to go to the bathroom, who did I go to? I woke up my counselor, Mrs. Ungurs. She got out of bed and let me know, "It's okay. Everything's gonna be alright." I remember Mrs. Ungurs, and my mom and dad, of course, who have always been there in tough times and let me know it's okay.

Another of these moments was shared with me during VBS. I had the opportunity to talk with Walt Elbrecht, and he told me what had happened to him. Many of you have met or at least seen Walt and Carol—they're members at St. James—they met at St. James back in the day. Walt and Carol were even here (at Unity) at the New Year's Eve service. They're definitely a couple—I don't imagine that anyone thinks of one without the other. I'll share with you the story Walt told me, and I bet he'll share with you if he has the chance.

*\[Illustration]*  For Walt Elbrecht served in the U.S. Army during the Vietnam War. And for those of you who know Walt know that he's an accountant. Even as a young man he was interested in accounting and wanted to get into it. So, after taking his basic training at Fort Benning, I believe, he knew that there was finance training available, again I believe, at Fort Benjamin Harrison in Indianapolis. He was posted somewhere in northern Wisconsin with his eye on getting accounting training at Fort Benjamin Harrison and his orders came up. The officer, who may have been a colonel, called Walt in to give him his orders. And Walt, as you know, was waiting to hear "Fort Benjamin Harrison." What he heard, though, was some other place—I can't remember that detail—ask Walt; he'll tell you.

He saw a golden opportunity slip away, and he had the courage to dispute his orders with the officer. Perhaps you have been at some point eminently qualified for a job that was denied you–if so, you know the feeling. Who's going to speak up for you? (At this point it would be better for Walt to tell you the story.) He spoke up for himself but the officer wasn't going to have it. The officer simply told him, "Did you hear what I said?" and sent him away.

Walt was upset that day, but long story short, if he had gone to Benjamin Harrison, he learned later that he would have been sent to a combat zone. And one more detail that the Lord had in mind: Walt is an only child. What he tells me, and I believe, is that the Lord took perfect care of him and his family. This is the *It's okay* moment where the Lord has His arm around us to let us know that everything's gonna be okay.

*\[Transition]*  So, when our Lord says in the Holy Gospel, **"FEAR NOT, LITTLE FLOCK,"**  He is telling us as our Good Shepherd for the umpteenth time, "It's okay. Everything's gonna be alright." Which brings up our sermon hymn, *O Little Flock, Fear Not the Foe*.
> *O little flock, fear not the foe*
> *Who madly seeks your overthrow;* 
> *Dread not his rage and pow'r.*

The hymn brings up the devil. As we sing it, our Lord tells us not to fear the devil. For He tells us through the mouth of St. Peter,
> **Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God so that at the proper time He may exalt you, casting all your anxieties on Him, because He cares for you. Be sober-minded; be watchful. Your adversary the devil prowls around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour.**  (1 Pet. 5:6–8)

And we are also told through the mouth of St. John, **"The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil"**  (1 John 3:8b). We sing the hymn *O Little Flock, Fear Not the Foe* as believers in Christ who know that our Good Shepherd takes perfect care of us and *\[Crucifixion]*  has laid down His life for us so that the wolf cannot snatch us away (John 10:11–15). Scripture is clear, and how nice it is when our hymns teach us to sing exactly as God teaches us to believe in His Word.

*\[Ask]*  And by the way, did you notice the hymn number for our sermon hymn? (666.) Should we be concerned? No.

Of course, when it comes to Christ conquering the devil for us, I cannot neglect mentioning anoth hymn that automatically comes to my mind as we rejoice as Christ's flock, safe from the devil. *\[Ask]*  Does this one also come up for you?

> *Though devils all the world should fill,* 
> *All eager to devour us,* 
> *We tremble not, we fear no ill;* 
> *They shall not overpow'r us.* 
> *This world's prince may still*
> *Scowl fierce as he will,* 
> *He can harm us none.* 
> *He's judged; the deed is done;* 
> *One little Word can fell him.*

And that little Word, belovèd in the Lord, that topples the devil is the name of Jesus, our God and Savior.

In His name our sins are carried away as far as the east is from the west (Ps. 103). By faith in His name *\[font]*  our Baptism saves us and *\[altar]*  His body and blood constantly assure us that all is forgiven and the devil's accusations mean nothing. **FEAR NOT, LITTLE FLOCK, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom** in Jesus' name.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Today is also the Commemoration of Lawrence, Deacon and Martyr.

Heb. 11: by faith.

Heb. 11:11: she considered Him faithful who had promised.

**"He who did not spare his own Son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things?"**  (Rom. 8:32)