---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 18, 2024
title: THOSE WHO SOW IN TEARS SHALL REAP WITH SHOUTS OF JOY!
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Advent midweek
readings:
  - Ps. 126
sermon_text: Ps. 126
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE WHO GOES OUT WEEPING SHALL COME HOME WITH SHOUTS OF JOY.

Belovèd in the Lord, there is a point of Bible history for us to remember tonight. For the prophet Jeremiah had foretold concerning the kingdom of Judah,
> **Thus says the LORD: When seventy years are completed for Babylon, I will visit you, and I will fulfill to you my promise and bring you back to this place. For I know the plans I have for you, declares the LORD, plans for welfare and not for evil, to give you a future and a hope. Then you will call upon me and come and pray to me, and I will hear you. You will seek me and find me, when you seek me with all your heart. I will be found by you, declares the LORD, and I will restore your fortunes and gather you from all the nations and all the places where I have driven you, declares the LORD, and I will bring you back to the place from which I sent you into exile.**  (Jer. 29:10–14)

So Jeremiah prophesied and the prophecy was fulfilled. Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, besieged Jerusalem and deported the Jews to Babylon in 605 B.C. Then Cyrus, king of Persia, authorized the Jews to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the temple in 538 B.C. 605 minus 538 is … 67 years—that's close enough. The prophecy of Jeremiah was fulfilled.

We have before us *joy*. What joy to return home to Jerusalem after living in Babylonian exile for seventy years! What joy to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem that Nebuchadnezzar had destroyed! What joy to worship the One True God of Israel again at the place the LORD Himself had chosen, at the temple on Mt. Zion! *\[Direct to 1st 3 verses in bulletin; read responisvely]*

"We are glad. We got our temple back, just like the LORD had promised us! Alleluia! HE WHO GOES OUT WEEPING SHALL COME HOME WITH SHOUTS OF JOY. Today is our day of joy before the nations. We have our temple again." You may recall that the governor of the Jews at that time was Nehemiah and the scribe Ezra kept them grounded in God's Word as they rebuilt the temple, which was completed, by the grace of God, in 516 B.C. 538 minus 516 is … 22 years. It took 22 years to rebuild the temple.

God's chosen people may have thought at that time that they would worship forever at the temple in Jerusalem. But the LORD's plans of welfare for His people, to give them a future and a hope—the LORD's plans were to be heard by, of all people, a Samaritan woman at the well. It is written in John, chapter 4,
> **Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain** ***nor in Jerusalem*** **will you worship the Father. You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is from the Jews. But the hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him.**  (John 4:21b–23)

The Messiah, who spoke these words to the Samaritan woman, was to be born of Mary—the Messiah, Jesus, whose own body was to be the temple to be the fulfillment of the temple in Jerusalem.
> **"Destroy this temple, \[He says,] and in three days I will raise it up." The Jews then said, "It has taken** ***forty-six years*** **to build this temple, and will you raise it up in three days?" But \[Jesus] was speaking about the temple of** ***His body*.**  (John 2:19–21)

*\[Ask]*  How is it 46 years and not 22 years? Nehemiah built the second temple in 22, but Herod would build the third temple in 46 years. Nevertheless, we cannot but rejoice at the birth of the One whose body comes to bear our sins—whose body is the temple that matters most.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
The themes for the four Sundays of Advent are
1. Hope
2. Peace
3. Joy
4. Love


## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |