---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 11, 2024
title: PROPITIATION PROMISED
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Advent midweek
readings:
  - Ps. 85
sermon_text: Ps. 85
bible_version: ESV
---

# PROPITIATION PROMISED
Belovèd in the Lord, you may recall from last week's midweek sermon that those who first prayed Psalm 80 may have been Baal worshipers but had repented and called upon the LORD, the One True God of Israel, to save them out of the trouble they had gotten themselves into. (The LORD does save them the same way He saves you and me: in the name of Jesus.) The time to stop worshiping Baal was yesterday, for there is no greater waste than to worship an idol (Ps. 97:7).

Not only the waste—but tonight we recall God's anger toward idolaters. Jezebel, in her day, may have been the most infamous Baal worshiper: she even put to death the prophets of the LORD (1 Ki. 18:4). Today is a day to recall how the LORD, the One True God of Israel, was angry with her and made an example of her. He called the prophet Elijah to stand up to Jezebel and to mock Baal (1 Ki. 18:27). Elijah also prophesied that Jezebel would die and be eaten by dogs in Jezreel (1 Ki. 21:23), and that's what happened (2 Ki. 9:35–37). Today we bring to mind God's jealous anger toward idolaters (Ex. 20:5) and how that anger was carried out against unrepentant Jezebel.

*\[Transition]*  Yet for those who heed the preaching of John the Baptist, the Elijah who was to come—for us who hear the preaching of John and turn away from Baal, the LORD declares to us in Psalm 85, verse 3 *\[direct congregation to the psalm]* , **"You withdrew all your wrath; you turned from your hot anger."**  We are not the only ones turning: we turn from our idols. But the LORD turns from His hot anger and everything gets much better very quickly. By the coming of the Messiah proclaimed by John, God reveals that He has turned from His hot anger: *He promises propitiation*. Propitiation is wonderful—propitiation is that God has turned from His hot anger.

Why does He turn from His hot anger? We have the answer before us, in verse 2: **"You forgave the iniquity of your people;** ***you covered all their sin*."**  God does something on His own in which we do not participate in any way: He atones for our sin—He covers it up so that He does not see it anymore—He is no longer angry. With the coming of the Son of God we see the One who does the propitiating for us and who turns His Father's anger away from us: we see Jesus born of Mary.

*\[Illustration]*  For it's the Christmas season but you know that the world has a different take on Christmas. By promising propitiation the LORD does something that, you may be surprised to know—the LORD contradicts one of our favorite Christmas carols:
> *He sees you when you're sleeping*
> *He knows when you're awake*
> *He knows if you've been bad or good*
> *So be good for goodness sake*

because if you're not good there's coal in your stocking. That's what it means. This is a carol about Santa Claus, but if we take Santa Claus to be God's helper and *He knows if you've been bad or good So be good for goodness sake*, what does this have to do with propitiation? *Santa Claus is Coming to Town* has *nothing to do with propitiation*. Propitiation means that if we've been *bad*, God has a Christmas present for our stocking: His Son Jesus *is meant only for those of with whom God has been angry*. Jesus works propitiation for us; He's our Christmas present. He will work propitiation for us by the shedding of His holy, precious blood which covers all our sin.

*\[Conclusion]*  Psalm 85 is comforting because it sets before our hearts right for the beginning that God has it in His heart to forgive us everything and not be angry with us anymore. His declaration of forgiveness is right at the top of the psalm, in verse 2, and we have the rest of the psalm to give thanks for our forgiveness and to praise God for all the consequences or our forgiveness in Jesus' name.
* He's not angry with us anymore (v. 3).
* **"Will you be angry with us forever?"**  That's now a rhetorical question. The answer is No (v. 5).
* **"Will You not revive us again?"**  Will You you not make us alive again? The answer is Yes (v. 6). The Messiah comes not only to shed His blood for us but to *rule in our hearts* and make us very alive.
* **"Show us Your steadfast love, O LORD."**  We have before us the Hebrew word *hesed*, which is a *very big word* (v. 7). In your King James Bible this word, *hesed*, is translated *mercy*, but in the English Standard Version it is translated *steadfast love*. This is the word for God's love toward us. We perhaps begin to understand God's *hesed* toward us when we speak of *unconditional* love, for we have done nothing to deserve His love for us in Christ Jesus. Still, we have it.
* And finally, **"Let me hear what God the LORD will speak, for He will speak peace to his people, to his saints; but let them not turn back to folly"**  (v. 8). True peace arises when our heavenly Father forgives us everyting in Jesus' name. But let us never, with Christ ruling in our hearts, never return to Baal and make a mockery of our forgiveness.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
The themes for the four Sundays of Advent are
1. Hope
2. Peace
3. Joy
4. Love


Psalm 85:8
\[8] Let me hear what God the LORD will speak,
for he will speak peace to his people, to his saints;
but let them not turn back to folly. (ESV)

Psalm 85:10
\[10] Steadfast love and faithfulness meet;
righteousness and peace kiss each other. (ESV)
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |