---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 04, 2024
title: RESTORE US, O LORD
occasion: 1st Sunday in Advent midweek
readings:
  - Ps. 85
sermon_text: Ps. 85
bible_version: ESV
---

# RESTORE US, O LORD

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, there comes a time, when things have gotten bad enough, that we would really appreciate if things would be better again. There may be perhaps no better example than Adam and Eve. Speaking of things getting better … At first things were perfect.

Genesis 2:7
\[7] then the LORD God formed the man of dust from the ground and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and the man became a living creature. (ESV)

When things went bad God turned His face from Adam and Eve. They sure turned their face from Him.

The Lord has fed us with the bread of tears (5a), but our hopes are up that things will get better.

HOPE

O LORD God of hosts, how long will you be angry with your people's prayers? (4)

Genesis 3:15
\[15] I will put enmity between you and the woman,
and between your seed and her seed;
he shall bruise your head,
and you shall bruise his heel.” (ESV)

We put our hope in the Seed of the Woman.

Psalm 80:17
\[17] But let your hand be on the man of your right hand,
the son of man whom you have made strong for yourself! (ESV)

We put our hope in the Son of Man.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
The themes for the four Sundays of Advent are
1. Hope
2. Peace
3. Joy
4. Love

V. 1. God again declares Himself to be our Shepherd. He is located in a cloud above the Mercy Seat.

If God repeats it, we should listen.

Psalm 80:7
\[7] Restore us, O God of hosts;
let your face shine, that we may be saved! (ESV)
Psalm 80:19
\[19] Restore us, O LORD God of hosts!
Let your face shine, that we may be saved! (ESV)

***Son of Man*** mentioned by name.

Psalm 80:17
\[17] But let your hand be on the man of your right hand,
the son of man whom you have made strong for yourself! (ESV)

What follows is all the verses in Matthew's Gospel where our Lord says, "the Son of Man." There are many!

Matthew 8:20
\[20] And Jesus said to him, “Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head.” (ESV)

Matthew 9:6–7
\[6] But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins”—he then said to the paralytic—“Rise, pick up your bed and go home.” \[7] And he rose and went home. (ESV)

Matthew 10:23
\[23] When they persecute you in one town, flee to the next, for truly, I say to you, you will not have gone through all the towns of Israel before the Son of Man comes. (ESV)

Matthew 11:19
\[19] The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, ‘Look at him! A glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!’ Yet wisdom is justified by her deeds.” (ESV)

Matthew 12:8
\[8] For the Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath.” (ESV)

Matthew 12:32
\[32] And whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come. (ESV)

Matthew 12:40
\[40] For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. (ESV)

Matthew 13:37–43
\[37] He answered, “The one who sows the good seed is the Son of Man. \[38] The field is the world, and the good seed is the sons of the kingdom. The weeds are the sons of the evil one, \[39] and the enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels. \[40] Just as the weeds are gathered and burned with fire, so will it be at the end of the age. \[41] The Son of Man will send his angels, and they will gather out of his kingdom all causes of sin and all law-breakers, \[42] and throw them into the fiery furnace. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth. \[43] Then the righteous will shine like the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears, let him hear. (ESV)

Matthew 16:13
\[13] Now when Jesus came into the district of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?” (ESV)

Matthew 16:27–28
\[27] For the Son of Man is going to come with his angels in the glory of his Father, and then he will repay each person according to what he has done. \[28] Truly, I say to you, there are some standing here who will not taste death until they see the Son of Man coming in his kingdom.” (ESV)

Matthew 17:9–13
\[9] And as they were coming down the mountain, Jesus commanded them, “Tell no one the vision, until the Son of Man is raised from the dead.” \[10] And the disciples asked him, “Then why do the scribes say that first Elijah must come?” \[11] He answered, “Elijah does come, and he will restore all things. \[12] But I tell you that Elijah has already come, and they did not recognize him, but did to him whatever they pleased. So also the Son of Man will certainly suffer at their hands.” \[13] Then the disciples understood that he was speaking to them of John the Baptist. (ESV)

Matthew 17:22–23
\[22] As they were gathering in Galilee, Jesus said to them, “The Son of Man is about to be delivered into the hands of men, \[23] and they will kill him, and he will be raised on the third day.” And they were greatly distressed. (ESV)

Matthew 19:28
\[28] Jesus said to them, “Truly, I say to you, in the new world, when the Son of Man will sit on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. (ESV)

Matthew 20:18
\[18] “See, we are going up to Jerusalem. And the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death (ESV)

Matthew 20:28
\[28] even as the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many.” (ESV)

Matthew 24:27–28
\[27] For as the lightning comes from the east and shines as far as the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. \[28] Wherever the corpse is, there the vultures will gather. (ESV)

Matthew 24:30–31
\[30] Then will appear in heaven the sign of the Son of Man, and then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of heaven with power and great glory. \[31] And he will send out his angels with a loud trumpet call, and they will gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the other. (ESV)

Matthew 24:37–39
\[37] For as were the days of Noah, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. \[38] For as in those days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day when Noah entered the ark, \[39] and they were unaware until the flood came and swept them all away, so will be the coming of the Son of Man. (ESV)

Matthew 24:44
\[44] Therefore you also must be ready, for the Son of Man is coming at an hour you do not expect. (ESV)

Matthew 25:31–32
\[31] “When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. \[32] Before him will be gathered all the nations, and he will separate people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. (ESV)

Matthew 26:2
\[2] “You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.” (ESV)

Matthew 26:24
\[24] The Son of Man goes as it is written of him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would have been better for that man if he had not been born.” (ESV)

Matthew 26:45
\[45] Then he came to the disciples and said to them, “Sleep and take your rest later on. See, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. (ESV)

Matthew 26:63–64
\[63] But Jesus remained silent. And the high priest said to him, “I adjure you by the living God, tell us if you are the Christ, the Son of God.” \[64] Jesus said to him, “You have said so. But I tell you, from now on you will see the Son of Man seated at the right hand of Power and coming on the clouds of heaven.” (ESV)