---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 18, 2026
title: TRADITION MAY TEACH
occasion: Ash Wednesday
readings:
  - Joel 2:12-19
  - 2 Cor. 5:20b-6:10
  - Matt. 6:1-6, 16-21
sermon_text: Joel 2:12-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# TRADITION MAY TEACH

Belovèd in the Lord, the theme for our Lenten midweek services this year is *Stations of the Cross*, and they are listed for you in the bulletin. Please take a moment and turn to pp. 15–16 of your bulletin … and let us go over the Stations of the Cross together.
* I. Jesus is Condemned to Death
* II. Jesus Takes Up the Cross
* III. Jesus Falls under the Weight of the Cross
* IV. Jesus Meets His Mother
* V. Simon of Cyrene Carries the Cross for Jesus
* VI. A Woman Shows Mercy to Jesus
* VII. Jesus Falls a Second Time
* VIII. Jesus Meets the Women of Jerusalem
* IX. Jesus Falls a Third Time
* X. Jesus Is Stripped of His Garments
* XI. Jesus Is Nailed to the Cross
* XII. Jesus Dies on the Cross
* XIII. Jesus Is Taken Down from the Cross
* XIV. Jesus Is Laid in the Tomb

There are fourteen stations of the Cross and they amount to a meditation on the Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ. Remember that in the Church, when you hear *Passion*, especially during Lent, it means *Suffering*. During Lent we pay particular attention to the Suffering of Christ — we hear of the Passion of Christ and take it to heart because He bore it all because He loves us and was determined to save us for our sins.

Please, looking again at the list, take note that Stations III, IV, VI, VII, and IX look different from the others. *\[Ask]*  Do they look different in your bulletin? What makes *Jesus Falls under the Weight of the Cross*, *Jesus Meets His Mother*, *A Woman Shows Mercy to Jesus*, *Jesus Falls a Second Time*, and *Jesus Falls a Third Time* different from the other stations *is that they are not taken directly from the Bible* — you cannot open your Bible and read about them — these Stations are *tradition*, not Scripture. There are many traditions in the Christian Church.

We could do away with tradition and stick strictly to the Bible, but this year with Stations of the Cross we will surely stick to the Bible but take the opportunity to wrestle with tradition and see what comes of it. TRADITION MAY TEACH us something — let's find out.

Tonight I want to focus on Stations III, VII, and IX:

* III. Jesus Falls under the Weight of the Cross
* VII. Jesus Falls a Second Time
* IX. Jesus Falls a Third Time

*\[Ask]*  Did you know that nowhere in the Bible is it written that Jesus fell carrying the Cross? The Bible does record that Simon of Cyrene carried the Cross for Jesus (Luke 23:26), that's Station V, but nowhere is it written that our Lord fell down under the burden of the Cross while He carried it for us to Golgotha — He may not have fallen down at all!

But if it is possible that He did not fall down at all, why make it a tradition that He did? That's the question. Let's take a clue from the tradition of our Lord falling down carrying the Cross. The tradition states that our Lord fell *three times* — let us take that and turn to our Bibles.

It *is* written in 1 Samuel, chapter 3 that the Lord called Samuel to be priest.
> **The LORD called Samuel, and he said, “Here I am!” and ran to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call; lie down again.” So he went and lay down. And the LORD called again, “Samuel!” and Samuel arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” But he said, “I did not call, my son; lie down again.” Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, and the word of the LORD had not yet been revealed to him. And the LORD called Samuel again the** ***third time*. And he arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” Then Eli perceived that the LORD was calling the boy.**  (1 Sam. 3:4–8)

After the third time, Eli perceived that the LORD was calling Samuel. Look for threes to point out and emphasize, "This is what God is doing."

We have another example from the Old Testament with Elijah and the false prophets of Baal. It is written in 1 Kings, chapter 18,
> **\[Elijah] put the wood in order and cut the bull in pieces and laid it on the wood. And he said, “Fill four jars with water and pour it on the burnt offering and on the wood.” And he said, “Do it a second time.” And they did it a second time. And he said, “Do it a third time.” And they did it** ***a third time*. And the water ran around the altar and filled the trench also with water.**  (1 Ki. 18:33–35)

*\[Ask]*  The third time proved what? It proved that Baal is a worthless idol and that the God of Israel is the One True God! The third time not only pointed out and emphasized, "This is what God is doing," but it pointed out and emphasized, "Here is what the True God does that worthless idols cannot."

Now we turn back to the tradition that Christ fell three times carrying the Cross. *\[Ask]*  What would a mocker say of Christ carrying the Cross and falling under its weight?
> **He trusts in God; let God deliver him now, if he desires him. For he said, "I am the Son of God."**  (Matt. 27:43)

Jesus says He's God but unbelievers mock Him for claiming that. *But by faith*, as He falls three times while being mocked we, by the grace of the Spirit, see the Son of God willingly bearing our sins for us. "Now," turning to the mockers we ask, "what is your god doing? Will your idol demand nothing of you and still save you? Is you idol even *able* to save you from death? Behold, that is what the One True God does even as you mock Him."

**"Why should they say among the peoples, 'Where is their God?' "**  See our God saving us from our sin. Belovèd in the Lord, tradition may be valuable for strengthening our faith according to the Scriptures. TRADITION MAY TEACH, according to the Scriptures. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
1 Samuel 3:8
\[8] And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli and said, “Here I am, for you called me.” Then Eli perceived that the LORD was calling the boy. (ESV)


Joel 2:17–19
\[17] Between the vestibule and the altar
let the priests, the ministers of the LORD, weep
and say, “Spare your people, O LORD,
and make not your heritage a reproach,
a byword among the nations.
Why should they say among the peoples,
‘Where is their God?’”


\[18] Then the LORD became jealous for his land
and had pity on his people.
\[19] The LORD answered and said to his people,
“Behold, I am sending to you
grain, wine, and oil,
and you will be satisfied;
and I will no more make you
a reproach among the nations. (ESV)