---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: May 18, 2025
title: NO ONE WILL TAKE YOUR JOY FROM YOU.
occasion: 5th Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 11:1-18
  - Rev. 21:1-7
  - John 16:12-22
sermon_text: John 16:12-22
bible_version: ESV
---

# NO ONE WILL TAKE YOUR JOY FROM YOU.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We rejoice, Lord Jesus, in You. For You live and reign with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, even though Mother's Day was last week, that doesn't mean we have to stop. For hear again our Holy Gospel:
> **Truly, truly, I say to you, you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will turn into joy. When a woman is giving birth, she has sorrow because her hour has come, but when she has delivered the baby, she no longer remembers the anguish, for joy that a human being has been born into the world.**

Last week we honored our mothers who really did give birth to us, but now a mother's joy at the birth of her child is given to each of us *as a metaphor*—as a word picture of our own joy, whether we've given birth to a child or not. **"So also you have sorrow now, but I will see you again, and your hearts will rejoice, and NO ONE WILL TAKE YOUR JOY FROM YOU."**

Our Lord had said this before His Passion and Resurrection, but now that He has risen from the dead, it's time to remember what He said and believe it! Christ's Resurrection from the dead is our time to rejoice as a mother who has given birth to her baby and holds her in her arms for the first time—or she could have given birth to a son—her joy is the same. This is a moment of pure joy in a mother's life that she never forgets, and neither will we forget our joy that Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! And we are saved!

*\[Transition]*  Saved from sin, saved from death, saved from condemnation, and saved from hell, for sure, but our Holy Gospel suggests we take the angle that we are saved *from the world*. For the world, our Lord says, rejoiced at His death. **"Crucify Him!"**  (Mark 15:13–14), they shouted. "We want Jesus dead." How does Scripture teach us to understand the hatred of the world? St. John writes in his first epistle,
> **We know that everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning, but He who was born of God protects him, and the evil one does not touch him. We know that we are from God, and** ***the whole world lies in the power of the evil one*.**  (1 John 5:18–19)

The world is under the influence of the devil, and if you need any convincing, just look around. I won't even bring up any examples—no, I'll bring up one: drugs. There, I'll just say *drugs* and you can fill in the rest. Because it's out of control, like everyone's gone crazy—they're dancing under the influence of drugs, and Satan's playing the tune. It's a point that I don't even need to explain anymore because you already know it, and for some of you it may be quite painful. But do I need to convince you any more of what God plainly tells us: **the whole world lies in the power of the evil one**? I don't think you need any more convincing.

Now this passage that we just heard about Satan haveing power over the world did say, **"We know that everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning."**  *\[Ask]*  Did you know that is in the Bible? And you need to know right away that there's another passage that says the opposite, and that's Romans, chapter 7:
> **For I know that nothing good dwells in me, that is, in my flesh. For I have the desire to do what is right, but not the ability to carry it out. For I do not do the good I want, but the evil I do not want is what** ***I keep on doing*.**  (Rom. 7:18–19)

*\[Ask]*  Did you know that is in the Bible, too? So which is it: *keep on sinning* or *not keep on sinning*? They're both in the Bible. Which passage should we get rid of: *not keep on sinning* or *keep on sinning*? Beware! Never, never, no, not ever should we get rid of *any* passage in the Bible—do not play around with God's Word! (Study church history and see what happens when we tamper with God's Word.) Keep God's Word as He has given it to us and confess the truth: we are a paradox of Romans, chapter 7 and 1 John, chapter 5. We keep on sinning because our flesh has not died yet, *but* … still in our flesh, our Baptism into Christ's Resurrection gives us the exciting, joyful opportunity to live a new life now and forever! To be assured of this need look no farther than Romans, chapter 6: **"We were buried therefore with \[Christ] by Baptism into death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,**  ***we too*** **might walk in newness of life"**  (Rom. 6:4).

*\[Transition]*  And, belovèd in the Lord, this is where pure joy kicks in and NO ONE WILL TAKE YOUR JOY FROM YOU. Open to us are not only the doors of heaven, but here on earth, we are given a new life through faith in Jesus Christ our Lord, who rose from the dead. Our Baptism guarantees it. Our Baptism guarantees it because it is not just water, but Baptism is **the washing of rebirth and renewal by the Holy Spirit, who He poured out on us generously through Jesus Christ our Savior** (Titus 3:5b-6). It is pure joy to live a new life as a child of God, born from above in the name of Jesus, *and*, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, drowning our old Adam by faith in what God plainly promises us in our Baptism: a new life in the Holy Spirit. Now we are living on the side of **"everyone who has been born of God does not keep on sinning."**  The Spirit, who lives in us, hates sinning.

But now the world hates *us*, as our Lord has said:
> **This is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil. For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his works should be exposed. But whoever does what is true comes to the light, so that it may be clearly seen that his works have been carried out in God.**  (John 3:19–21)

Belovèd in the Lord, it is pure joy to even *begin* to carry out any work in God. This is joy on the scale of a mother holding her newborn baby. And NO ONE WILL TAKE YOUR JOY FROM YOU.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Romans 4:22–25
\[22] That is why his faith was “counted to him as righteousness.” \[23] But the words “it was counted to him” were not written for his sake alone, \[24] but for ours also. It will be counted to us who believe in him who raised from the dead Jesus our Lord, \[25] who was delivered up for our trespasses and raised for our justification. (ESV)

1 Peter 1:3–5
\[3] Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! According to his great mercy, he has caused us to be born again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, \[4] to an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you, \[5] who by God’s power are being guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time. (ESV)

From this upcoming Sunday’s epistle reading: **Revelation 21:2 (NA28) — 2** καὶ τὴν πόλιν τὴν ἁγίαν Ἰερουσαλὴμ καινὴν εἶδον καταβαίνουσαν ἐκ τοῦ οὐρανοῦ ἀπὸ τοῦ θεοῦ ἡτοιμασμένην ὡς νύμφην κεκοσμημένην τῷ ἀνδρὶ αὐτῆς.

English translations like the ESV translate that as **Revelation 21:2 (ESV) — 2** And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.

In that translation, the Holy City is presumably sent by God from Heaven.  But no . . . the Greek communicates something even much more beautiful and profound.

The word ἡτοιμασμένην is a perfect passive participle, and what we would typically call a “Divine passive,” meaning that the implied actor of the verb is God Himself.  And with that, if we take the preposition ἀπὸ not as “from” but translate it as “by”—as in agency—what we see is this: “I saw the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down from Heaven, *having been prepared by God as a bride* adorned for her husband.”

1 John 2:15–17
\[15] Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. \[16] For all that is in the world—the desires of the flesh and the desires of the eyes and pride of life—is not from the Father but is from the world. \[17] And the world is passing away along with its desires, but whoever does the will of God abides forever. (ESV)