---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 16, 2025
title: HEAVEN AND EARTH WILL PASS AWAY
occasion: 23rd Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Mal. 4
  - 2 Thess. 3:1-13
  - Luke 21:5-36
sermon_text: Luke 21:5-36
bible_version: ESV
---

# HEAVEN AND EARTH WILL PASS AWAY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Heavenly Father, grant us Your Spirit, that we ever keep the Word of Your Son, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, what do we have that we can depend on? We can depend on Dad's old wrench — his wrench has turned bolts for a long time. We can depend on Mom's old cookie sheet — her cookie sheet has been through the oven hundreds of times and I see more delicious cookies in the future. And what shall we say about appliances? Are they built to last? Or cars? There are too many thing that fail us, and we hear in today's Holy Gospel that even **HEAVEN AND EARTH WILL PASS AWAY** — we cannot even depend on heaven and earth. What are we then to depend on?

Even though **HEAVEN AND EARTH WILL PASS AWAY**, we are told what to depend on in today's Holy Gospel, where we find our Lord Jesus in Jerusalem, in the holy city, **teaching the people in the temple and preaching the Gospel** (Luke 20:1). The temple is, for the Jews, that one thing on which they depend — it is the holy place, sanctioned by God, where prayers rise up to heaven as incense, where blood sacrifices are made to atone for sin, and where God's Word is taught by rabbis. We find our Lord Jesus is teaching there, for He is considered to be a rabbi (Mark 9:5; 10:51).

But there is tension in the air.
> **The chief priests and the scribes with the elders came up and said to \[Jesus], "Tell us** ***by what authority*** **You do these things, or who it is that gave You this authority."**

Our Lord may be teaching and preaching, but His authority is being questioned. When He speaks, the people generally accept His authority, but the chief priests, who are in charge of the temple, *question* His authority, as do the scribes and the elders.
> **\[Jesus] answered them, "I also will ask you a question. Now tell me, was the baptism of John \[the Baptist] from heaven or from man?" And they discussed it with one another, saying, "If we say, 'From heaven,' He will say, 'Why did you not believe him?' "**

For John the Baptist is the one who pointed to Jesus and said, **"Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!"**  (John 1:29) John is also the one who pointed to Jesus and said, **"He must increase, but I must decrease"**  (John 3:30). And everyone believed John and everyone believed that his baptism was from heaven. John the Baptist's authority was not questioned by anyone, yet he confessed that Jesus was greater than he was. We have the chief priests in this quandary, not sure how to respond about the authority of John the Baptist and the authority of Jesus.
> **And they discussed it with one another, saying, "If we say, 'From heaven,' \[Jesus] will say, 'Why did you not believe him?' But if we say, 'From man,' all the people will stone us to death, for they are convinced that John was a prophet." So they answered that they did not know where it came from. And Jesus said to them, "Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things."**  (Luke 20:1b–8)

Christ's authority has been called into question. John the Baptist asserted Christ's authority but the chief priests question it as our Lord teaches and preaches in the temple.

There's a lot going on in the temple this day, including last week's Holy Gospel, where Jesus states to the Sadducees, to do not believe in the resurrection of the dead — our Lord declares that **GOD IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING**. Now we come to today's Holy Gospel.
> **While some were speaking of the temple, how it was adorned with noble stones and offerings, \[Jesus] said, "As for these things that you see, the days will come when there will not be left here one stone upon another that will not be thrown down."**

The day of the destruction of the temple is coming — that temple on which the Jews depend will be destroyed. *\[Ask]*  Do you happen to recall when this prophecy was fulfilled? It was fulfilled in 70 A.D., during the reign of the Roman emperor Nero. Forty years after Christ's Crucifixion, Resurrection, and Ascension, the Romans destroyed the temple in Jerusalem, just as Christ said it would be. For your information, this important fulfillment of Christ's prophecy is not overlooked in old hymnals. Our current hymnal does not have it, but many old hymnals have a section that records the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem in 70 A.D. *\[Show old hymnal]*  My great-grandfather's hymnal has it.

Be that as it may, we continue to hear our Lord teach in our Holy Gospel.
> **They asked Him, "Teacher, when will these things be, and what will be the sign when these things are about to take place?" And He said, "See that you are not led astray. For many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he!' and, 'The time is at hand!' Do not go after them. And when you hear of wars and tumults, do not be terrified, for these things must first take place, but the end will not be at once."**

It is noteworthy that our Lord comforts us, **"do not be terrified,"**  though events may rage around us. And beware of false Christs.
> **Then \[Jesus] said to them, "Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be great earthquakes, and in various places famines and pestilences. And there will be terrors and great signs from heaven.**

To this, most people say, "Look! It's happening right now." No one can deny it: these things foretold by Christ are all happening. But now comes The somber reminder.
> **But** ***before*** **all this they will lay their hands on you and persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons, and you will be brought before kings and governors for My name's sake. This will be your opportunity to bear witness.**

This also is happening now, and will happen in increasing measure even among us. Take note that our Lord tells us, **"** ***before*** **all this"**  — before the wars and earthquakes believers in Jesus will be persecuted first. And when we are dragged in front of worldly authorities, do not worry about what to say. We have the Holy Spirit living in us, and the Spirit will give us Words to say, to give witness to Jesus, our Lord.

*\[Transition]* In short, everything will be shaken, and we will be left needing only that on which we can depend. Let us ever remember the preaching of John the Baptist:
> **"** ***Repent*, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." For this is he who was spoken of by the prophet Isaiah when he said, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness: 'Prepare the way of the Lord \[Jesus]; make His paths straight.' "**  (Matt. 3:2–3)

**"I tell you, there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner who repents"**  (Luke 15:10). *\[Font]*  Belovèd in the Lord, let us ever return to our Baptism and believe that everything that we have repented of is washed away in the name of Jesus.

And let us never doubt the Crucifixion of our Lord Jesus for the forgiveness of our sins, His Resurrection from the dead for our justification, and His Ascension by which His Spirit is poured out into our hearts — historical facts that we depend on.

And now, let us ever remember what our Lord tells us in today's Holy Gospel: "HEAVEN AND EARTH WILL PASS AWAY, but My Words will not pass away." Christ's Word is utterly dependable as our world is shaken around us.

*\[Conclusion]*  And let it be some comfort to hear what Christ promises in John, chapter 14.
> **If anyone loves Me, he will keep My Word, and My Father will love him, and we will come to him and make Our home with him. Whoever does not love Me does not keep My Words. And the Word that you hear is not mine but the Father's who sent Me.**  (John 14:23–24)

Keep Christ's word and we will learn that what it means that love never fails (1 Cor. 13:8). **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Church buildings try to communicate the permanence of God's Word.

Matthew 23:8
\[8] But you are not to be called rabbi, for you have one teacher, and you are all brothers. (ESV)