---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 20, 2025
title: BY HIS STEADFAST LOVE IT IS DONE
occasion: Feast of St. Thomas, Apostle
readings:
  - Judg. 6:36–40
  - Ps. 136:1–4
  - Eph. 4:7, 11–16
  - John 20:24–29
sermon_text: Ps. 136:1–4
bible_version: ESV
---

# BY HIS STEADFAST LOVE IT IS DONE
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Merciful Father, we thank You for Your steadfast love toward us —  shown to us in Your Son, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have before us a famous, oft-repeated phrase from the Bible, **"for His steadfast love endures forever."**  If you are familiar with the King James Version, it is **"for his mercy endureth for ever."**  We also have before us the the psalm that repeats this phrase over and over again. The first line of the psalm is **"Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good, for His steadfast love endures forever."**  The psalm is Psalm 136.

In addition to Psalm 136 we also have before us today St. Thomas, the apostle — today is his feast day in the church calendar. His moment of fame is today's Holy Gospel.
> **Now Thomas, one of the twelve, called the Twin, was not with them when Jesus came. So the other disciples told him, "We have seen the Lord." But he said to them, "Unless I see in his hands the mark of the nails, and place my finger into the mark of the nails, and place my hand into his side, I will never believe."**  (John 20:24–25)

For the soldier had thrust his spear *\[Crucifixion]*  into the side of our Lord when He hung dead on the Cross, and out of that wound came blood and water (John 19:34). Thomas demanded to see the wound before he would believe that Christ had risen from the dead; for this, he is called *Doubting Thomas*. Thomas is the one to whom our resurrected Lord appeared and *showed him* the wound in His side by the spear and the wounds in his hands by the nails. Let this be our first thought on ***His steadfast love endures forever***. Our Lord Jesus Christ, though He was forsaken by His Father on the Cross, bearing our sins (Mark 15:34) — is nevertheless now alive with a resurrection body. Different from His earthly body, His resurrection body cannot die. Yet on this brand-new body are still seen the wounds of His Crucifixion — the wounds of His death. Christ has conquered death and has wounds to show for it.

Belovèd in the Lord, let us remember what our Lord has said concerning the resurrection from the dead:
> **Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live. For as the Father has life in Himself, so He has granted the Son also to have life in Himself. And He has given Him authority to execute judgment, because He is the Son of Man. Do not marvel at this, for an hour is coming when all who are in the tombs will hear His voice and come out, those who have done good to the resurrection of life, and those who have done evil to the resurrection of judgment.**  (John 5:25–29)

By faith in Christ, and having lived our faith with recognizable fruit, for
> **You will recognize them by their fruits. Are grapes gathered from thornbushes, or figs from thistles?**  (Matt. 7:16)

— having lived our faith with recognizable fruit, the same resurrection of life as that which our Lord demonstrated to Thomas is also *ours*. Alleluia — **for His steadfast love endures forever**! The enduring love of the Father for us saw Him *\[Crucifixion]*  put His own Son through death to save us, and then *\[Resurrection]*  raise Him up to the resurrection of life *which now extends further even to us* who would have otherwise died in our sins. All this is a *gift* to us from our heavenly Father — none of us has earned it but we *inherit* it by faith in His Son, Jesus.

*\[Transiton]*  Upholding our salvation is Jesus Christ, the revelation of our Father's love for us. Our life stands on God's love, and there's a Hebrew word for it — not just love — *hesed* — in English this Hebrew word from the Old Testament has been translated *steadfast love* and *mercy*. This is the Word repeated over and over again in Psalm 136: **"Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, for His hesed endures forever."**  *Hesed* is rendered in the King James as *mercy*. I am so familiar with *mercy* that at first I was annoyed that the English Standard Version changed *mercy* to *steadfast love*. But *hesed* is a big word. Chad Bird, a Hebrew scholar [has written](https://www.1517.org/articles/untranslatable-love),
> ***Chesed*** **is truly untranslatable love. No-holds-barred mercy. Covenant faithfulness even if it costs God the lifeblood of his beloved Son.** ***Chesed*** **is the beating heart of God in cruciform display. The kind of love that chases us to the ends of the earth, picks us up, places us atop divine shoulders, and dances all the way home. There really is only one word that encompasses the totality of what** ***chesed*** **is—Christ Himself. He is the** ***chesed*** **of the Father made flesh.**

And so, *Chesed* is a very good Word to bring up as we prepare to celebrate the birth of Christ. Though I was at first concerned about translating *chesed* as *steadfast love* instead of the traditional *mercy*, I no longer feel that way. *Mercy* is one syllable shorter than *steadfast love* and does bring out the a clear aspect of God's love of which the Bible clearly testifies, and that is that He wants to show mercy to sinners. *Mercy* means that kindness has been shown, but not to one who deserves it. God's mercy is shown to us in that **while we were still sinners, Christ died for us** (Rom. 5:8). *Steadfast love*, on the other hand, adds an adjective that tries to explain God's love, God's *steadfast* love.

Take for example, God's love toward His chosen nation, Israel. He took them out of Egyptian slavery with a mighty arm, afflicting Pharaoh with plagues and leading them safely through the Red Sea. He gave them His holy Law on Sinai, yet the Israelites grew impatient and worshiped the golden calf. *Yet* the Lord *still* took their descendants to the Promised Land, as He had promised. He never gave up on His nation and He never will.

We now turn to Psalm 136, which takes this approach to praising God for His steadfast love toward us.
> **Give thanks to the LORD, for He is good, for His steadfast love endures forever.**
> **Give thanks to the God of gods, for His steadfast love endures forever.**
> **Give thanks to the Lord of lords, for His steadfast love endures forever;**
> **to Him who alone does great wonders, for His steadfast love endures forever.**

The phrase *for His steadfast love endures forever* repeats over and over again as we give thanks to the Lord for His steadfast love.
> **to Him who by understanding made the heavens, … to Him who spread out the earth above the waters, … to Him who made the great lights, … the sun to rule over the day, … the moon and stars to rule over the night, … to Him who struck down the firstborn of Egypt, … and brought Israel out from among them, … with a strong hand and an outstretched arm, … to Him who divided the Red Sea in two, … and made Israel pass through the midst of it, … but overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea, … to Him who led his people through the wilderness, … to Him who struck down great kings, … and killed mighty kings, … Sihon, king of the Amorites, … and Og, king of Bashan, … and gave their land as a heritage, … a heritage to Israel his servant, for His steadfast love endures forever.**  (Ps. 136:5–22, edited)

Note that in this reading I have edited out *for His steadfast love endures forever* seventeen times and only left in the last one. But here we praise the God of Israel for His faithfulness to His people — to a love that never gives up — **for His** ***steadfast*** **love** ***endures*** **forever**.

What the Bible reveals to us is that in this Promised Land Israel established a kingdom, and to King David the Lord promised, **"Your throne shall be established forever"**  (2 Sam. 7:16b), announcing the coming of the Messiah, who would establish His kingdom and rule forever. The steadfast love of the God of Israel would continue with her through all her idolatry until the day the Messiah came. In the very last words of the Old Testament the prophet Malachi announced,
> **Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes. And he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the land with a decree of utter destruction.**  (Mal. 4:5–6)

And Elijah did come; he was John the Baptist. And John the Baptist prepared the way for the Lord, as Isaiah had prophesied. And John the Baptist announced,
> **I baptize you with water for repentance, but He who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.**  (Matt. 3:11)

And the One whom John announced, who increased while John decreased, was *\[Crucifixion]* crucified bearing our sins, and what does the sign say above His head? *Jesus Christ King of the Jews* — behold the promised Messiah came to bear the sins of the world and establish His *heavenly* kingdom that will never end.

Having gone over so many thing so broadly I invite to consider what our Lord said about Himself and His Father. **"My Father is working until now, and I am working"**  (John 5:17). God's love never gives up, and it is revealed to us in His Son, Jesus, who even called Doubting Thomas to be an apostle. His doubt or our little faith in no way diminishes God's steadfast love, which is still seen at this very moment in the wounds of our resurrected Lord. Blessed are we who have not seen Him but still believe. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Psalm 136:1–4; antiphon: v. 26

Isaiah 19:19–25
\[19] In that day there will be an altar to the LORD in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to the LORD at its border. \[20] It will be a sign and a witness to the LORD of hosts in the land of Egypt. When they cry to the LORD because of oppressors, he will send them a savior and defender, and deliver them. \[21] And the LORD will make himself known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians will know the LORD in that day and worship with sacrifice and offering, and they will make vows to the LORD and perform them. \[22] And the LORD will strike Egypt, striking and healing, and they will return to the LORD, and he will listen to their pleas for mercy and heal them.
\[23] In that day there will be a highway from Egypt to Assyria, and Assyria will come into Egypt, and Egypt into Assyria, and the Egyptians will worship with the Assyrians.
\[24] In that day Israel will be the third with Egypt and Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the earth, \[25] whom the LORD of hosts has blessed, saying, “Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel my inheritance.” (ESV)

— to still send them the Messiah — to send Him not only to Israel but to *expand* Israel to include the Gentiles.