---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: June 1, 2025
title: THE FATHER AND THE SON IN YOU AND ME
occasion: 7th Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 1:12-26
  - Rev. 22:1-20
  - John 17:20-26
sermon_text: John 17:20-26
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE FATHER AND THE SON IN YOU AND ME

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Come, Lord Jesus, and live in our hearts with the Father. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Jesus loves you; there's no doubt about it. Last week, however, I suggested to you that there is more to it than Jesus loves you because *\[Gethsemane]*  Jesus also loves His Father, of which we are ever reminded by our Gethsemane window.

We are also free to approach our heavenly Father directly because of our faith in His Son, as the Son teaches us, **"Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in My name, He will give it to you"**  (John 16:23b). Instead of speculating about the Trinity, we are now integrated *into* the Trinity—our prayers and petitions in Jesus' name are the Father's priority. *\[Illustration]*  How many times have we been sent to voicemail? Pray to the Father in Jesus' name and He'll pick up *every time*.

Furthermore, when we are instructed to pray the *Our Father* in Luther's Small Catechism, we come across the the First Petition:
> **Hallowed be Thy name.**  *What does this mean?*  God's name is certainly holy in itself, but we pray in this petition that it may be kept holy among us also. *How is God's name kept holy?*  God's name is kept holy when the Word of God is taught in its truth and purity, *and we, as the children of God, also lead holy lives according to it.*  Help us to do this, dear Father in heaven!

Let us bring to remembrance this page out of the Catechism as we consider today's Holy Gospel. Our Lord Jesus prays to His, and our, heavenly Father on the night that He is betrayed.
> **I do not ask for these only, but also for those who will believe in Me through their word, that they may all be one, just as You, Father, are in Me, and I in You, that they also may be in Us, so that the world may believe that You have sent Me.**

As we rejoice that *Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!* , we bring to remembrance all that He said before His Passion, like that He is the true God of Israel (John 8:48). We bring to remembrance all that He said before His Passion and we know that it's all true, for He rose from the dead to back it up. Now here, on the day He was betrayed, before He headed over to Gethsemane to pray, our Lord Jesus is praying for every single one of us here today, for those who will believe in Him through the apostles' preaching and teaching, which is exactly who we are. For at some point in history a preacher was called and sent by the Spirit—a worker was sent into the harvest (Luke 10:2)—to proclaim the apostles' message of Christ crucified for sinners to every corner of the world and to reap the harvest.
> **How then will they call on Him in whom they have not believed? And how are they to believe in Him of whom they have never heard? And how are they to hear without someone preaching? And how are they to preach unless they are sent? As it is written, "How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the good news** \[of Jesus] **!"**  (Rom. 10:14–15)

They were sent and here we are. For us our Lord prays,  **"that they may all be one, just as You, Father, are in Me, and I in You, that they also may be in Us, so that the world may believe that You have sent Me."**  Belovèd in the Lord, when we come to personal faith in Jesus, we are not meant to be me-and-Jesus off in the corner by ourselves: we are meant to **"all be one, just as You, Father, are in Me, and I in You, that they also may be in Us."**  You just heard it and I want to underline it: **"that they also may be** ***in Us*."**

Belovèd in the Lord, this is a mystery of our faith—something wonderful that is true but difficult to comprehend—that we are, by the grace of the Spirit, *in* the Father and the Son. We can look back *\[font]*  to our Baptism and remember **"\[baptize] them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit"**  (Matt. 28:19b) and know that we're in—we're one with the Father and the Son and each other. The Bible calls us the body of Christ.
> **Now you are the body of Christ and individually members of it. And God has appointed in the church first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healing, helping, administrating, and various kinds of tongues. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all work miracles? Do all possess gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret? But earnestly desire the higher gifts.**  (1 Cor. 12:27–31a)

We have THE FATHER AND THE SON IN YOU AND ME, manifested by various gifts of the Spirit—and don't forget **love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness,** \[and]  **self-control** (Gal. 5:22–23). We not only believe in God, but we are *part of Him*. *\[Understatement]*  Now isn't that something?

*\[Transition]*  Going back to the Catechism, we want to properly understand and utterly believe God's Word so that *we, as the children of God, also lead holy lives according to it. Help us to do this, dear Father in heaven!*  How are we to do this? By the grace of the Holy Spirit—we *need* the Spirit living in us to push back against our flesh—and, boy, do we have much to celebrate next week!

We have the Spirit and we also have Christ's perfect example, given to us in the Bible, for direction. Remember that *on the same night* He prays for all of us to be one with the Father and the Son, He also prays *\[Gethsemane]* ,
> **Father, if You are willing, remove this cup from Me. Nevertheless, not My will, but Yours, be done.**  (Luke 22:42)

Christ, though He and the Father are One (John 10:30), wants only to listen to His Father. In the same way, we, though we are one with the Father and the Son, want only to hear the voice of our Good Shepherd and follow Him (John 10:4). When we follow Christ and not the devil, we are not only doing well, *we are part of God in this world*. And let us ever remember that this is **"so that the world may believe that You have sent Me."**  Our life together with each other and with Father, Son, and Holy Spirit demonstrates to the world that Christ was sent by His Father to bear our sins and win our forgiveness.

*\[Transition]*  That would be enough for a sermon, but I have only preached on the first two verses of the Holy Gospel. There's more: **"The** ***glory*** **that you have given me I have given to them, that they may be one even as we are one."**  I didn't say it: Christ said it: ***glory***. Christ gives us His glory. And before we go on thinking that our lives in this world will be like a Super Bowl halftime show, let us remember the Cross—let us ever keep in our hearts that **God shows his love for us in that while we were still sinners, Christ died for us** (Rom. 5:8). God's glory was shown on the Cross where He sacrificially loved us—*that's* glory. So, belovèd in the Lord, anything that requires sacrificial love on our part—if it hurts and we do it out of love for our Lord and our neighbor—Christ's glory shines in the world. It's THE FATHER AND THE SON IN YOU AND ME. Help us, Holy Spirit, to bear that fruit so that the world would know that we belong to Christ (Matt. 7:16).

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Justin Martyr was born around 100 and raised in a pagan environment. At age 32, he became a Christian. His faith and scholarly work make him a renowned Apologist and philosopher. His defenses of Christians and their faith are well-written and give insights into the early church's historical progression. His works that expound upon the sovereignty of God and God's divine plan make the connection between the Old and New Testaments clear. Justin's works detailed Greek philosophy and church history before he was beheaded for his faith around 165 in Rome.

In Acts 1, Peter quotes Ps. 69 and Ps. 109.

Acts 1:25
\[25] to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas turned aside to go to his own place.” (ESV)

Judas went to hell.

Casting lots could have involved [sticks, stones, or sheep knuckles](https://youtu.be/tsKz9RyDr8Y?feature=shared).

Revelation 22:2
\[2] through the middle of the street of the city; also, on either side of the river, the tree of life with its twelve kinds of fruit, yielding its fruit each month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations. (ESV)

The tree of life is last seen in Genesis and then again in Rev. 2:7. It appears as a metaphor in Proverbs multiple times.

Revelation 22:4
\[4] They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads. (ESV)

Here we are told that we will see Christ's face.

Revelation 22:14–15
\[14] Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates. \[15] Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral (πὀρνοι) and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood. (ESV)