---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: July 27, 2025
title: PRAY THIS WAY
occasion: 7th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Gen. 18:17-33
  - Col. 2:6-19
  - Luke 11:1-13
sermon_text: Luke 11:1-13
bible_version: ESV
---

# PRAY THIS WAY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Spirit, to pray boldly in the name of Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, in our Holy Gospel today our Lord teaches us to pray the Lord's Prayer, which is as widely known as can be. There is a parallel passage in the Sermon on the Mount, in Matthew, chapter 6. *\[Sermon on the Mount. Explain the window, especially the praying hands.]*  Today's sermon, therefore, is on prayer.

I invite you to turn your attention to our Holy Gospel and these introductory Words of our Lord Jesus Christ: **"When you pray, say"**  —not " *If* you pray"—**"** ***When*** **your pray."**  You will pray—it's inevitable—you will pray sooner or later. Even atheists pray in the foxhole. Prayer is assumed or implied throughout the Bible, not just here where our Lord says, **"When you pray."**  If I were to say prayer is not an option—you *will* pray—that would make prayer a law, which is not how to look at prayer. Prayer isn't a law, it's a huge privilege for us to talk with our Father who art in heaven in the name of His Son, Jesus.

But for those who would like to take prayer as an option—for those who might hesitate to ask God for something—who might prefer not to pray—we have the well-known example of King Ahaz, in Isaiah, chapter 7, which we normally hear at Christmastime:
> **The LORD spoke to Ahaz: "Ask a sign of the LORD your God; let it be deep as Sheol or high as heaven." But Ahaz said, "I will not ask, and I will not put the LORD to the test."**  (Is. 7:10–12)

An invitation from God to King Ahaz to ask for anything. But Ahaz did not want to ask anything of the LORD even though the LORD had made him the offer. Nevertheless, Ahaz preferred not to pray. He made a false show of piety when he said, **"I will not put the LORD to the test,"**  as if it were polite on his part not to bother God. Though Ahaz didn't ask anything, Isaiah still gave a reply from the LORD—*\[ask]*  do you remember the LORD's reply? **"Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel"**  (Is. 7:14b)—the LORD's reply was to proclaim the birth of Christ anyway. Alleluia!

And so it is that even if we do not ask, the Lord will answer. This is reflected in the teaching of the Small Catechism, for example, in the Second Petition.
> **Thy kingdom come.**  What does this mean? The kingdom of God certainly comes by itself *without our prayer*, but we pray in this petition that it may come to us also.

Our asking for God's kingdom to come is not necessary for it to come—God's kingdom comes whether we ask for it or not—God gives us our daily bread whether we ask for it or not. But note that Christ, in giving us the Lord's Prayer, teaches us to ask for these things anyway—prayer is never out of order.

And so, having brought up Ahaz and having checked the Small Catechism, let us move on to more examples of prayer found in the Bible. Ahaz made a false show of piety by indicating that he did not want to bother God. But speaking of bothering, our Lord, in Luke, chapter 18, gives us the persistent widow as a model for Christian prayer.
> **In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man. And there was a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, "Give me justice against my adversary." For a while \[the judge] refused, but afterward he said to himself, "Though I neither fear God nor respect man, yet** ***because this widow keeps bothering me*, I will give her justice, so that she will not beat me down by her continual coming."**  (Luke 18:2–5)

I hope you've heard this before. Our Lord teaches us to pray like a nagging widow—this happens to be prayer that *pleases* the Lord.

And to continue with this theme, our Lord gives us in today's Holy Gospel the example of the impudent, that is, the rude friend banging on the door at night asking for three loaves of bread.
> **Which of you who has a friend will go to him at midnight and say to him, "Friend, lend me three loaves, for a friend of mine has arrived on a journey, and I have nothing to set before him"; and he will answer from within, "Do not bother me; the door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I cannot get up and give you anything"? I tell you, though he will not get up and give him anything because he is his friend, yet** ***because of his impudence*** **he will rise and give him whatever he needs. And I tell you, ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you.**


*\[Ask]*  Question: is God bothered by our prayers? No! No, in no way, God is not at all bothered by our prayers: He *wants* us, He *invites* us, He *teaches us* to bother Him all we want. See if the Lord ever tires of our prayers.

Yet there are some prayers that the Lord may tire of, as we are taught in James, chapter 1:
> **If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask God, who gives generously to all without reproach, and it will be given him. But let him ask** ***in faith, with no doubting*, for the one who doubts is like a wave of the sea that is driven and tossed by the wind. For that person must not suppose that he will receive anything from the Lord; he is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.**  (James 1:5–8)

**"He who did not spare his own Son but gave him up for us all, how will he not also with him graciously give us all things?"**  (Rom. 8:32) Belovèd in the Lord, in view of our salvation in Jesus, there is no reason to doubt!

So, we are given all things in the name of Jesus. Yet Walt Elbrecht at St. James was quick to point out that there is prayer, said in complete faith in Jesus, that yields the answer opposite of what we ask for. Remember the thorn in Paul's flesh.
> **To keep me from becoming conceited …, a thorn was given me in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to harass me, to keep me from becoming conceited. Three times I pleaded with the Lord about this, that it should leave me. But he said to me, "My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness." Therefore I will boast all the more gladly of my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest upon me.**  (2 Cor. 12:7a, 7c–9)

God's answer to Paul's prayer was "No. I will keep this thorn in your flesh so that you do not become conceited."

We have another example of prayer to consider, and it is the example from our Old Testament lesson. It is not so much a prayer but it is the account of Abraham talking face-to-face with the LORD and making requests of Him.
> **So the men turned from there and went toward Sodom, but Abraham still stood before the LORD. Then Abraham drew near and said, "Will You indeed sweep away the righteous with the wicked? Suppose there are fifty righteous within the city. Will You then sweep away the place and not spare it for the fifty righteous who are in it? Far be it from You to do such a thing, to put the righteous to death with the wicked, so that the righteous fare as the wicked! Far be that from You! Shall not the Judge of all the earth do what is just?"**  (Gen. 18:22–25)

Abraham asks God to change His mind about punishing sinners. "Save the sinners for the sake of the righteous" is Abraham's argument. **"And the LORD said, 'If I find at Sodom fifty righteous in the city, I will spare the whole place for their sake' "**  (Gen. 18:26). But Abraham is persistent, he does not back down. (We heard earlier that the LORD is happy to hear persistent prayer.) *\[Ask]*  Do you remember the sequence?

* "I will spare the city for fifty righteous." Abraham talks the LORD down.
* "I will spare the city for forty-five righteous." Abraham talks Him down again.
* "I will spare the city for forty righteous." Abraham talks Him down again.
* "I will spare the city for thirty righteous." Abraham talks Him down again. Do you get the feeling that God is getting angry with Abraham?
* "I will spare the city for twenty righteous." Abraham talks Him down one more time.
* "I will spare the city for ten righteous."

But the ten were lacking and God destroyed Sodom for sexual sin.

Belovèd in the Lord, do you get the feeling, however, that God is, at any point, getting angry with Abraham? No, not at Abraham. And please note the nature of Abraham's request: he is asking God to show mercy to sinners. This prayer God has answered for us all. *\[Crucifixion]*
> **For God so loved the world, that He gave His only Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through Him.**  (John 3:16–17)

including any caught up on the sin of Sodom. And, No, there is no indication that God is angry with Abraham for talking Him down. Abraham is pleading for God to show mercy to sinners, which is something we know is in God's character: He has shown mercy to us sinners in His Son, Jesus, who bore our sins on the Cross. Alleluia!

*\[Conclusion]*  How then are we to pray? Twice in the Gospels our Lord teaches us the Lord's Prayer. In Luke, He teaches us the Lord's Prayer and then adds, "If you don't know what to ask for, pray that you receive the Holy Spirit." And by the grace of the Holy Spirit, how are we to pray?
> **Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us.**  What does this mean? We pray in this petition that our Father in heaven would not look at our sins, or deny our prayer because of them. We are neither worthy of the things for which we pray, nor have we deserved them, but we ask that He would give them all to us by grace, for we daily sin much and surely deserve nothing but punishment. So we too will sincerely forgive and gladly do good to those who sin against us.

By the grace of the Spirit, may we ever say and do for our enemies as we pray in the name of Jesus. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Examples of prayer from the Bible.

Luke 18:2–5
\[2] He said, “In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man. \[3] And there was a widow in that city who kept coming to him and saying, ‘Give me justice against my adversary.’ \[4] For a while he refused, but afterward he said to himself, ‘Though I neither fear God nor respect man, \[5] yet because this widow keeps bothering me, I will give her justice, so that she will not beat me down by her continual coming.’” (ESV)

The impudent man in today's Holy Gospel.

Walt brought this up as an example of prayer:

2 Corinthians 12:7–9
\[7] So to keep me from becoming conceited because of the surpassing greatness of the revelations, a thorn was given me in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to harass me, to keep me from becoming conceited. \[8] Three times I pleaded with the Lord about this, that it should leave me. \[9] But he said to me, “My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness.” Therefore I will boast all the more gladly of my weaknesses, so that the power of Christ may rest upon me. (ESV)

Which brings us to Christ praying in Gethsemane: Luke 22:42
\[42] saying, “Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done.” (ESV)

St. Paul puts it this way in 1 Thessalonians, chapter 5: **"Pray without ceasing"**  (1 Thess. 5:17). If you're praying anyway, you might as well never stop.

And, of course, our Old Testament lesson. Abraham talked God down for the cause of mercy.

The prayer of a wicked man is counted as sin.

Psalm 109:7
\[7] When he is tried, let him come forth guilty;
let his prayer be counted as sin! (ESV)