---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: October 6, 2024
title: GOD WANTS BABY TALK
occasion: 20th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Gen. 2:18-25
  - Heb. 2:1-18
  - Mark 10:2-16
sermon_text: Mark 10:2-16
bible_version: ESV
---

# GOD WANTS BABY TALK
(This is a re-preaching of a sermon I preached on October 4, 2009.)

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, *\[ask]*  have you ever raised a teenager? … Have you ever raised a baby? … What's the difference?
* For one you have to change his or her diaper but other does his business on his own.
* One smells sweeter than the other—other than that diaper change, that is.
* One is easier to wrestle than the other.

Another difference between a baby and a teenager—and the one on which we will focus today—is talk: the conversation you have with a baby is different than the conversation you have with a teenager.

Baby talk is definitely different from teenager talk. First of all, we parents feed the baby—we feed her with food, yes, but we also feed her with *words*. "Mama loves you, dumpling. What's in your diaper? Look, it's Daddy." And so baby's vocabulary grows, mostly supplied by her parents and older siblings. It *is* remarkable that your child learned practically all of his or her words from you. Teenagers, on the other hand, have many more sources of vocabulary, and, God forbid, these days their phones can be particularly harmful sources of vocabulary. *\[Anecdote]*  You know, even before cell phones, even before I was a teenager, I was able to learn some vocabulary in the neighborhood that earned me … a taste … of soap.

Another difference between talking with a baby and talking with a teenager is that one trusts you more and the other challenges you more. Challenging is not all that bad, though. But you can sure tell the difference between talking to a baby and talking to a teenager. Don't get me wrong: talking to a teenager is wonderful—I would even say it's an honor—in that we are participating in the formation of an adult—the teenager, by talking to you, is learning to speak as an adult.

*\[Transition]*  Now in the Gospel of Mark our Lord warns us about a particular kind of talk that is harmful—so dangerous that He warns us, **"Watch out; beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod"**  (Mark 8:15b). The Gospel of Luke records a warning with a bit more detail: **"Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is** ***hypocrisy*"**  (Luke 12:1b). This kind of speech, hypocrisy, is dangerous to our souls. Our Lord goes on to say,
> **Nothing is covered up that will not be revealed, or hidden that will not be known. Therefore whatever you have said in the dark shall be heard in the light, and what you have whispered in private rooms shall be proclaimed on the housetops.**  (Luke 12:2–3)

Now let us note the difference between the talk of a teenager and the talk of *a Pharisee*. When a teenager talks, hypocrisy, because of the flesh, has begun to creep in. But with a Pharisee, hypocrisy is full-blown. Some adults don't particularly enjoy being challenged by a teenager, but what may be particularly uncomfortable when we talk with a teenager is when we detect their budding hypocrisy—when he openly displays his own mistakes … by criticizing someone else, … and we say to ourselves, "I hide my mistakes better than this kid does. One day he'll be right up there with me."

*\[Transition]*  Our Holy Gospel today begins with God's clear teaching on marriage. As the teenager has now grown to be a man, he wants to marry a young woman. "I want her now … but maybe not later. Honey, I vow to take you to be my wedded wife, to have and to hold from this day forward, for better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in health, to love and to cherish, till death do us part, according to God's holy will; and I pledge you my faithfulness. … But would you mind signing a *prenuptual agreement*?" When we say one thing and then do another: this is *hypocrisy*—this is dangerous talk. Hypocrisy is the crusty shell of a hardened heart.

*\[Transition]*  And who are the ones we all recognize to *not* have a hardened heart? Children—children haven't gotten there yet and they are a blessing every time we get to talk with them. Under the *\[altar]*  new testament in Jesus' blood, we have received *\[font]*  what was promised by the prophet Ezekiel:
> **I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you. And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. And I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh.**  (Ezek. 36:25–26)

I've said it before and I'll say it again: because of the sin we are born with, we need a new heart. *\[Cross]*  Christ came to us to bear our sins—He bore our sins on the Cross and was raised from the dead that we would believe that He has truly borne our sins *away*—they're gone and not even to be remembered. Faith in God's forgiveness in Jesus' name and *\[font]*  Baptism in Jesus' name comes with the most wonderful gift of all gifts—and a gift badly needed—the gift of the Holy Spirit and a new heart of flesh *that has been cleansed of hypocrisy*.

How is Christ received as our Savior from sin? Like a child, says our Lord in today's Holy Gospel: **"Truly, I say to you, whoever does not receive the kingdom of God like a child shall not enter it."**  *\[Altar]*  Belovèd in the Lord, believe that Christ's body and blood are given and shed for us for the forgiveness of sins. To receive Christ like a child is to receive Christ without hypocrisy, confessing our own sin and not the sin of anyone else.

And in order that we may be properly prepared, this comes right into play *\[chancel]*  every Sunday morning when we stand before God and confess our sins. Please, in the name of Jesus, let us confess our sins openly before God like a child, not like the teenager who reveals his sins by criticizing someone else, and be prepared for the altar. Let this confession before God be a conversation between a baby and his or her heavenly Father. Even let Him supply the Words, if He must, but let it be with a heart without hypocrisy.

And then I'll stand in front of the congregation and say this as I have said so many times before:
> Almighty God in His mercy has given His Son to die for you and for His sake forgives you all your sins. As a called and ordained servant of Christ, and by His authority, I therefore forgive you all your sins in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.

And then, "Take and eat, the body of Christ; take and drink, the blood of Christ, given and shed for the forgiveness of your sins."

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Notes



## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |