---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 2, 2025
title: BLESSÈD BECAUSE OF JESUS
occasion: All Saints' Day
readings:
  - Rev. 7:2-17
  - 1 John 3:1-3
  - Matt. 5:1-12
sermon_text: Matt. 5:1-12
bible_version: ESV
---

# BLESSÈD BECAUSE OF JESUS

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, grant that we truly be blessèd in every way in the name of Your Son, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, All Saints' Day is the celebration of all saints, all of God's holy ones who are *\[font]*  washed and believe in Jesus for the forgiveness of our sins and are saved. All saints include the saints who have gone before us and rest from their labors in heaven, whom we will remember in our prayers today. We are told by the apostle John in our first reading from Revelation that all the saints in heaven are a great multitude:
> **I looked, and behold, a great multitude that no one could number, from** ***every*** **nation, from** ***all*** **tribes and peoples and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands, and crying out with a loud voice, "Salvation belongs to our God who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!"**  (Rev. 7:9–10)

Salvation belongs to Jesus, **the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world** (John 1:29).

There is a word that applies to our multitude — to those who belong to Jesus in heaven and we who are still here on earth — and that word is *blessèd*. Today, we will take up the word *blessèd* and then we will take up the word *righteous* — righteous and blessèd — words that apply to all the saints.

We hear the word *blessèd* multiple times from our Lord when He teaches us *\[Sermon on the Mount]*  in the Sermon on the Mount, which is today's Holy Gospel from Matthew, chapter 5.
> **Blessèd are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.** 
> **Blessèd are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.** 
> **Blessèd are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.**

Our Lord is just getting started with *blessèd*. But when we hear " **Blessèd are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth,"**  Psalm 37 should come to mind, for it is written in Psalm 37,
> **Refrain from anger, and forsake wrath!** 
> **Fret not yourself; it tends only to evil.** 
> **For the evildoers shall be cut off,** 
> **but those who wait for the LORD** ***shall inherit the land*.**  (Ps. 37:8–9)

Our Lord brings up the psalms a lot. Let us hear a little more from Psalm 37:
> **In just a little while, the wicked will be no more;**
> **though you look carefully at his place, he will not be there.**
> **But** ***the meek shall inherit the land*** **and delight themselves in abundant peace.**  (Ps. 37:10–11)

The meek are the ones who inherit the earth — God sees to it — while He judges the wicked and destroys them. And so, thanks to Psalm 37, we are reminded that in the Sermon on the Mount our Lord Jesus is speaking of God's righteous ones — those who do right, those who will not be destroyed for their wickedness. We hear more from Psalm 37: **"The wicked plots against** ***the righteous*** **and gnashes his teeth at him, but the Lord laughs at the wicked, for he sees that his day is coming"**  (Ps. 37:12–13). As you can see, the word *righteous* has come into play.

*Righteous*, quite simply, is a precious word, for the righteous shall inherit the earth and the wicked will be destroyed. The righteous, quite simply, have done right by God and the wicked have done wrong by God's holy Ten Commandments. Now is as good a time as any to go over the Commandments and then ask: which commandment is the most important? Here are the Ten Commandments:
1. **You shall have no other gods.**
2. **You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God.**
3. **Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy.**
4. **Honor your father and your mother.**
5. **You shall not murder.**
6. **You shall not commit adultery.**
7. **You shall not steal.**
8. **You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor.**
9. **You shall not covet your neighbor's house.**
10. **You shall not covet your neighbor's wife, or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.**

And as to the most important of these Commandments, our Lord Himself answers this question in Matthew, chapter 22:
> **"Teacher, which is the great commandment in the Law?" And \[our Lord] said to \[the lawyer], "You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind. This is the great and first commandment. And a second is like it: You shall love your neighbor as yourself. On these two commandments depend all the Law and the Prophets."**  (Matt. 22:36–40)

**"Love your neighbor and yourself"**  and **"Love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind"**  says it all. Love your neighbor and love God — *if* we do these, we are righteous.

Yet, I want to point out that in Matthew, chapter 5, the same chapter as our Holy Gospel, our Lord Jesus puts righteousness forward as a challenge, just a few verses after today's Holy Gospel. *\[Ask]* Ready for a challenge? **"For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven"**  (Matt. 5:20). And then a few verses later in the same chapter: **"You therefore must be perfect, as your heavenly Father is perfect"**  (Matt. 5:48). *\[Ask]*  Still ready for a challenge?

*\[Transition] \[humor]* Belovèd in the Lord, are we trying really hard to **be perfect as our heavenly Father is perfect**? … Keep trying. … We're almost there. *\[Understatement]* But unless we have no sin, we'll be trying for a long, long time. St. John comes to our help in his first epistle, which we quote in the liturgy for good reason: **"If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us."**  No one — not one of us — is able to be perfectly righteous because we are disabled by our sin. **"But if we confess our sins, God, who is faithful and just, will forgive our sins and** ***cleanse us*** **from all unrighteousness"**  (1 John 1:8–9).

Belovèd in the Lord, we need God's cleansing. Belovèd in the Lord, we need God to wash us before we stand righteous before Him. Belovèd and blessèd in the Lord, hear the Good News — this is the answer from the Bible to our unrighteousness: we are cleansed from our sin by the blood of Jesus! And when we trust in His holy, precious blood, what have we become? *All saints*. Alleluia! *Alleluia* on earth and *Alleluia* in heaven. Our wickedness, which sadly puts us in position to be destroyed from the earth — is cleansed by *\[altar]*  the blood of Jesus given and shed for us for the forgiveness of our sin! We are not blessèd because we have tried hard enough to be righteous. Nor are we blessèd because we tried harder than the Pharisees, and failed. We are BLESSÈD BECAUSE OF JESUS.

Our Lord Jesus tells us, **"Blessed are those who are persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."**  What kind of righteousness do we have for which others, even Satan, hates us? It is written in Psalm 51, **"Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God,**
**O God of my salvation, and my tongue will sing aloud of** ***Your*** **righteousness"**  (Ps. 51:14). Belovèd in the Lord, we wear Christ's righteousness, not our own — we wear Christ's righteousness as a *\[alb]*  white robe — our sin washed away, we are clean and righteous before God *no matter how hard Satan or anyone else accuses us*. Quite simply, we are innocent, because for the sake of *\[Crucifixion]* the sacrifice of Christ, on which we put all our trust, no charges will stick.

Belovèd in the Lord, I pray you are relieved, for by faith in the Lamb, who takes away the sin of the world, we have joined the great multitude, clothed in white robes, from all tribes and peoples and languages. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Psalm 51:14
\[14] Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, O God,
O God of my salvation,
and my tongue will sing aloud of your righteousness. (ESV)

Revelation 6:9–11
\[9] When he opened the fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of those who had been slain for the word of God and for the witness they had borne. \[10] They cried out with a loud voice, “O Sovereign Lord, holy and true, how long before you will judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?” \[11] Then they were each given a white robe and told to rest a little longer, until the number of their fellow servants and their brothers should be complete, who were to be killed as they themselves had been. (ESV)