---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: September 21, 2025
title: HE SEEKS SINNERS FOR DISCIPLES
occasion: Feast of St. Matthew
readings:
  - Ezek. 2:8-3:11
  - Eph. 4:7-16
  - Matt. 9:9-13
sermon_text: Matt. 9:9-13
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE SEEKS SINNERS FOR DISCIPLES

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank and praise you, Lord Jesus, that you came for us sinners. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, are you qualified—are you capable of doing a job? You, at one time, may have applied for a job, hoping that you were qualified for the position so that you would get that job. Maybe you got the job—maybe you didn't. *\[Illustration]*  I applied for a co-op job once. *\[Ask]*  Do you know what a co-op job is? (It happens to be that co-op jobs, as we know them today, were pioneered at the University of Cincinnati.) I had applied for a co-op job at a wheat seed company, and it was a job I wanted very much. I thought I was qualified for the job and I hoped very much I would get it. I got the job. (I'd rather tell you about that one than the ones I didn't get.)

And so, we would like to think that we are *highly qualified* for the job we want—there's nothing like being "highly qualified." Actually, all we need is that someone at the company *thinks* we're highly qualified and we're in—we get the job.

What I would like for us to consider today is who are the highly qualified people that Jesus calls to follow Him? Who are those highly qualified individuals He desires to be His disciples? Does He seek a track athlete? Does He seek the winner of *America's Got Talent*? What we see today, and that which is loudly proclaimed by St. Matthew, is that JESUS SEEKS SINNERS FOR DISCIPLES.

There's an expression in today's Holy Gospel for us to take note of and that expression is this: "tax collectors and sinners." Let us hear it again.
> **As Jesus reclined at table in the house, behold, many** ***tax collectors and sinners*** **came and were reclining with Jesus and His disciples. And when the Pharisees saw this, they said to His disciples, "Why does your teacher eat with** ***tax collectors and sinners*?"**

"Tax collectors and sinners" is like saying "Steelers fans and everyone else we don't like." But "Steelers fans" sets the tone—"Steeler's fans" lets you know what's. (Did you know that I had no clue about any of this till I moved to Cleveland?) "Jesus, why do you have anything to do with tax collectors and sinners?"

I just so happens that in the previous verse we learn the name of a particular tax collector:
> **\[Jesus] saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth, and He said to \[Matthew], "Follow Me." And he rose and followed Him.**

So this Matthew, the tax collector who leaves the tax booth to follow our Lord, is *the* famous St. Matthew, one of the twelve apostles *and*, by inspiration of the Holy Spirit, the writer of the first book of the New Testament: the Gospel of Matthew. Before Matthew was an evangelist and apostle, he was a *tax collector*, and there's nothing nice we can say about a tax collector.

Here's why. Even though God wants us to pay our taxes (Rom. 13:7), tax collectors in the Roman province of Judea were despised by the people because they were greedy and collected taxes for *the Romans*. *\[Illustration]*  Okay, let me put this in terms we can relate to. Suppose Canada invaded and took over Cleveland. That would be terrible. They would collect taxes from us—taxes so they can preserve and enlarge their empire. In Bible times the Romans had invaded the Holy Land. The land of the Jews was ruled by the Romans, and the Romans collected taxes from the Jews. How did the Romans collect taxes from the Jews? They recruited a particular type of person to be a tax collector: they recruited a Jew who was willing to collect tax money from his own people and hand it over to the occupying Romans. A tax collector is a traitor, but he does it legally. Matthew had been a tax collector, someone disliked by all, *\[bulletin]*  and we have have his picture on the bulletin cover.

Not only are tax collectors traitors, but their job is set up so that they can gratify their greed—again, legally. Collect a little extra and keep it for yourself is how I believe it went. So tax collectors are greedy traitors and there is nothing in the Bible to suggest that Matthew was any different.

Again,
> **\[Jesus] saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax booth, and He said to \[Matthew], "Follow Me." And he rose and followed Him.**

Belovèd in the Lord, who is highly qualified to be a disciple of Jesus? A tax collector. Whom does our Lord seek to follow Him? HE SEEKS SINNERS FOR DISCIPLES. Behold, our Lord Jesus Christ considers the tax collector Matthew highly qualified to be His disciple and calls *Him*, of all people. Did Matthew give up his greedy ways? We do have the record of one of the apostles who did not. **"\[Judas] was a thief, and having charge of the moneybag he used to help himself to what was put into it"**  (John 12:6b). Judas never gave up his greedy ways; Matthew must have—he gave up his greedy ways and followed Jesus.

*\[Transition; point to Matthew statue]* And Matthew has written for us a Gospel that underlines for us that JESUS SEEKS SINNERS FOR DISCIPLES. Turn to the third chapter of Matthew's Gospel. *\[Baptism]*  John the Baptist is preaching.

I baptize you with water for repentance, but He who is coming after me is mightier than I, whose sandals I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire. (Matt. 3:11)

John's ministry is nothing else than to call sinners—and *only* sinners—and baptize them with water for repentance. "Sinners, turn away from your sins."

And now,
> **Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him. John would have prevented him, saying, "I need to be baptized by you, and do you come to me?" But Jesus answered him, "Let it be so now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness."** (Matt. 3:13–15a)

Belovèd in the Lord, God the Father's righteousness is to send His Son to serve and save us sinners.
> **And when Jesus was baptized, immediately He went up from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened to Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming to rest on Him; and behold, a voice from heaven said, "This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased."**  (Matt. 3:16–17)

God the Father, in His mercy, is please to give us His Son. Matthew gives us Jesus in the water with sinners—baptized with sinners for repentance though He has no sins of His own to repent of. Still, count Jesus in with us sinners. There are no righteous people in the water with our Lord, only sinners. No righteous, sanctified people in the water with our Lord, only poor, miserable sinners. The Son of God is here for us sinners. At this point Matthew points out that we have Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.

Jesus thinks we sinners, an only us sinners, are highly qualified to be His. We're in—not by a snap of the fingers *\[Crucifixion]*  but by the Cross. For there on the Cross we behold our Lord bearing the burden of our sins for us—taking our punishment in our place, dying, *\[Resurrection]*  and then rising again to show that Christ has indeed saved us from our sins. Alleluia!

And at the end of Matthew's Gospel we are given our Lord's command to baptize, and again we hear the name of the one true God: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
> **All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you. And behold, I am with you always, to the end of the age.**  (Matt. 28:18–20)
>

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.


## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
EAT THIS SCROLL

I CAME NOT TO CALL THE RIGHTEOUS, BUT SINNERS.

Psalm 119:37
\[37] Turn my eyes from looking at worthless things;
and give me life in your ways. (ESV)

Mark 2:15–17
\[15] And as he reclined at table in his house, many tax collectors and sinners were reclining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many who followed him. \[16] And the scribes of the Pharisees, when they saw that he was eating with sinners and tax collectors, said to his disciples, “Why does he eat with tax collectors and sinners?” \[17] And when Jesus heard it, he said to them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.” (ESV)
;
Luke 5:29–32
\[29] And Levi made him a great feast in his house, and there was a large company of tax collectors and others reclining at table with them. \[30] And the Pharisees and their scribes grumbled at his disciples, saying, “Why do you eat and drink with tax collectors and sinners?” \[31] And Jesus answered them, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. \[32] I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.” (ESV)

Not that our Lord Jesus is hiring anyone in our Holy Gospel, but He is seeking disciples—He is seeking men, women, and children to believe in Him and follow Him. He was associating with people. An association with Jesus made you look good, since He was known to be a holy man for His authoritative teaching and His abilities to heal the sick and to cast out demons.
> **Jesus reclined at table in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and were reclining with Jesus and his disciples. And when the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, "Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?"**