---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: October 25, 2025
title: HE DID NOT COME TO DANCE
occasion: Reformation (observed)
readings:
  - Rev. 14:6-7
  - Rom. 3:19-28
  - Matt. 11:12-19
sermon_text: Matt. 11:12-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE DID NOT COME TO DANCE

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank and praise You, Lord Jesus, God's only Son, that You have worked our salvation. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, the Reformation is *not about Martin Luther*, and he was the first to say it. In fact, he *did* say it—he called himself *a bag of maggots*—that's a famous one—not as famous as *Here I stand*, but worth remembering all the same. Luther himself wrote,
> What is Luther? The teaching is not mine. *Nor was I crucified for anyone* … How did I, poor stinking *bag of maggots* that I am, come to the point where people call the children of Christ by my evil name? … I simply taught, preached, wrote God’s Word; otherwise I did nothing.

Belovèd in the Lord, we're not here to celebrate a bag of maggots—we're here to celebrate Christ, who was crucified for us, whose body did not see decay (Ps. 16:10), and whose body was raised from the dead for our justification (Rom. 4:25). Wow! Let's be the first to put Luther aside and celebrate Christ.

Furthermore, Luther did object to his name being used to designate any Christian. For he did say, "How did I come to the point where people call the children of Christ by my evil name?" Why call a Christian *Lutheran* at all? This is not the pope's question. This is not John Calvin's question. *Luther himself* questioned the use of his name at all. Yet history has left Luther's name everywhere, so let us consider what the label *Lutheran* means today, in a positive sense.
* We believe, teach, and confess that Jesus Christ, according to the Bible, and not Martin Luther, was crucified bearing the sins of the world.
* We believe, teach, and confess that by faith in Christ, and faith in Christ alone, according to the Bible, are we saved from sin, death, and hell. We heard it in our Epistle reading: **"For we hold that one is justified by faith apart from works of the law"**  (Rom. 3:28).
* We believe, teach, and confess, according to the Bible, that infants, by the grace of the Spirit, can and do believe in Jesus (Ps. 22:10; Luke 1:15) and therefore *\[font]*  we *gladly* baptize them and take care to instruct them in Christ's Word when they get older (Matt. 28:19–20).
* We believe, teach, and confess, according to the Bible, that *\[altar]*  Holy Communion is Christ's true body and blood, given and shed for us for the forgiveness of our sins (1 Cor. 10:16; 11:24–25).

That is the short version of what the label *Lutheran* means today.

We also have this expression, *We believe, teach, and confess, according to the Bible*, be our reminder that Luther was not alone, nor was he trying to express his opinion. He met together with other reformers of good conscience to carefully articulate how they, praying for the guidance of the Spirit, understood the Bible—where the Bible did agree with Roman Catholic teaching and practice, and where the Bible did not agree with Roman Catholic teaching and practice—the parts that did not agree with God's Word needed to be *reformed* to *conform* to the Bible. During the Reformation biblical teaching was carefully articulated and disseminated, thanks to the recent discovery of the printing press, so that Christ's Word was publicly read, discussed, and subscribed to.

There are multiple documents written during the Reformation that were *subscribed to*—they were printed out, studied, and signed by many Christians stating, "This is our public confession of faith. God said it. We believe it. Now we've printed it out and put our own names to it." The first of these confessions of faith written and subscribed to is the Augsburg Confession. I'll leave it at that. Call it a longer version of what the label *Lutheran* means today, in a positive sense.

*\[Transition]*  But never, ever, no, *not ever* shall we make an idol of a man, who is but a stinking bag of maggots. No man, woman, or child has ever, or will ever be able, to endure anything or accomplish a single thing that relieves his or her burden of sin, much less the burden of someone else's sin—*even one little ounce*. But Christ has done it.

We turn to Psalm 49 to allow Scripture to direct to understand who Christ is and what He has done for us sinners. It is written,
> **Truly no man can ransom another, or give to God the price of his life, for the ransom of their life is costly and can never suffice, that he should live on forever and never see the pit.**  (Ps. 49:7–9)

What's impossible for man is possible for God (Luke 18:27). To pay a ransom is to pay a price. Scripture expressly says that there is no price man is capable of paying that can save a single person from death, that he never die. (Medical science will never achieve it, either.) We're all born in sin, God knows the sins we've committed, and we're all going to die because of it (Rom. 5:12; 6:23). Who is even *able* to pay such a price, that saves anyone from death? Only God can do that. Again, we hear in Psalm 49, **"But God will ransom my soul from the power of Sheol, for He will receive me"**  (Ps. 49:15).

So, who is Jesus? *He is God—He alone is able to pay the price of our sins and He alone can save us from death.*  Not only is Jesus God, but He is also man—God chose to become one of us—and it happened in a wonderful way when Christ was conceived in the womb of the virgin Mary. Now God, wonder of wonders, has our own human blood, and Christ's lifeblood was designated before the foundation of the world *to be that price*—to be the ransom that pays for the sin of not one man, not two, but Christ's blood is the ransom that pays for the sin of every man, woman, or child who has ever lived—Christ's blood is the price that was paid on the Cross to save us from death. Alleluia! As St. Peter writes,
> **You were ransomed from the futile ways inherited from your forefathers, not with perishable things such as silver or gold,** ***but with the precious blood of Christ*, like that of a lamb without blemish or spot. He was foreknown before the foundation of the world but was made manifest in the last times for the sake of you who through Him are believers in God, who raised Him from the dead and gave Him glory, so that your faith and hope are in God.**  (1 Pet. 1:18–21)

Jesus is the Son of God, who with the Father and the Holy Spirit is the One True God. And now, laying Martin Luther aside, what did *Jesus* do?

*\[Transition]*  On this point we turn to our Holy Gospel. Our Lord Jesus is speaking in the Holy Gospel, first bringing up John the Baptist, who was the Elijah to come (Mal. 3:1; 4:5) to prepare the way for Christ—John the Baptist, calling on all sinners to repent that we may be forgiven by the blood of Christ.

And then our Lord says this:
> **But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces and calling to their playmates, "** ***We played the flute for you, and you did not dance*; we sang a dirge, and you did not mourn."**

Let's stick with this picture for the moment. Imagine playing a flute for Christ, and expecting Him to dance—we pick the tune and expect Him to move the way we want Him to move. The title for this sermon is *HE DID NOT COME TO DANCE*. I offer this title to you as an *understatement*. An understatement is a way to make a point, and we use understatements all the time.
* It would be an understatement to climb Mt. Everest and say, "I made it up the molehill."
* It would be an understatement to pay off someone's \$10K debt and say, "I chipped in a few bucks."

Considering the debt of our sin, this second understatement, "I chipped in a few bucks," is the direction we want to take concerning the salvation that Christ has won for us. In fact, our Lord Himself brings up this illustration of paying off a large debt. Christ tells us in Matthew, chapter 18,
> **The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who wished to settle accounts with his servants. When he began to settle, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.**

If you were being paid a wage, that's more money than you could earn in a lifetime.
> **And since \[the servant] could not pay, his master ordered him to be sold, with his wife and children and all that he had, and payment to be made. So the servant fell on his knees, imploring him, "Have patience with me, and I will pay you everything."**

That's silly—there's no way the servant can pay it all back. And then our Lord says, **"And out of pity for \[the servant], the master of that servant released him and forgave him the debt"**  (Matt. 18:23–27). Now we're talking—now we're talking about Christ's kingdom. We, how belong to Christ kingdom, can all say that the blood of Christ has paid off the debt of our sin—He has lifted the burden of our debt to God—He has paid for us with His holy, precious blood, and with His innocent suffering and death.

Has He danced for us? That's a foolish thing to say. To even think of Christ in this way, "I'll call the tune," is pure foolishness for which we pray for the Spirit's help that we never go there. But even to say "Christ, I'll do my part and You do Yours" is equally as bad. OUR LORD JESUS DID NOT COME TO DANCE! He came to save us and He had to do it with zero help from us or from Martin Luther. What He endured at the hands of us sinners was horrible and He had no help from a single person. He did, however, trust and love His Father through all of it. He was saved—He was raised from the dead on the third day, and the devil lies defeated. And, belovèd in the Lord, we are saved too by faith in Him. Alleluia! It is because of Christ's decisive victory that the works of the devil are destroyed (1 John 3:8). Death is defeated by the blood of the Lamb—our sins are paid for and we have no debt. The blood of Jesus has won salvation for every man, woman, and child.

HE DID NOT COME TO DANCE. What an understatement—He didn't dance—He fought the war for us *and He won*! To add anyone else's name, or to add our own, to our salvation is, and always will be, in error. Belovèd in the Lord, we need only believe in Jesus, as the Scriptures testify, and we are saved. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Matthew 9:10–13
\[10] And as Jesus reclined at table in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and were reclining with Jesus and his disciples. \[11] And when the Pharisees saw this, they said to his disciples, “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?” \[12] But when he heard it, he said, “Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those who are sick. \[13] Go and learn what this means: ‘I desire mercy, and not sacrifice.’ For I came not to call the righteous, but sinners.” (ESV)

The Reformation is not about history: it is about Christ Himself.