---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 2, 2025
title: THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY IN ISRAEL.
occasion: The Purification of Mary and the Presentation of our Lord
readings:
  - 1 Sam. 1:21-28
  - Hebrews 2:14-18
  - Luke 2:22-40
sermon_text: Luke 2:22-40
bible_version: ESV
---

# THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY IN ISRAEL.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today we have our Lord presented at the temple. During the season of Epiphany we often remember *\[12-year-old Jesus at the temple]*  that our Lord Jesus was at the temple for the Passover at the age of twelve. There, at the age of twelve, He amazed the teachers by listening to them and asking them questions about the Bible so that **all who heard him were amazed at His understanding and His answers** (Luke 2:47). Two weeks ago I preached on the wedding at Cana (John 2), which is also a familiar Epiphany theme. But today I am jumping back in time to a highly significant event that happened *before* the wedding at Cana and *before* twelve-year-old Jesus amazed everyone—I am jumping back in time but we are not leaving the temple. We are going back in time to when Mary, the mother of our Lord, kept the Law of Moses when she brought her Son Jesus to the temple to present Him the LORD and to make an offering for her own purification after having given birth. We are doing so today because the church calendar marks February 2 as the Feast of the Purification of Mary and the Presentation of our Lord. Why should we mark today as such an important day in the church calendar? By the grace of the Holy Spirit we would like to find out.

So, there are two articles in the Law of Moses that are being observed this day at the temple:

1. The Purification of Mary, and
2. The Presentation of our Lord.

The Presentation of our Lord was commanded to Moses by the LORD, the one True God of Israel, back in Exodus, chapter 13.
> **Consecrate to me all the firstborn. Whatever is the first to open the womb among the people of Israel, both of man and of beast, is mine.**  (Ex. 13:2)

This consecration calls for a sacrifice, of course. The LORD commanded this consecration of the firstborn for a reason.
> **When in time to come your son asks you, "What does this mean?" you shall say to him, "By a strong hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery. For when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, the LORD killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the firstborn of animals. Therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all the males that first open the womb, but all the firstborn of my sons I redeem." It shall be as a mark on your hand or frontlets between your eyes, for by a strong hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.**  (Ex. 13:14–16)

So this presentation, this consecration, is a reminder of the LORD's strong hand, the tenth plague, by which He saved His chosen people from slavery in Egypt. "How appropriate," we might recognize right away, "that the One who was born to save us from slavery to sin and the devil has now appeared at the temple for this remembrance commanded by the LORD to Moses."

The Purification of Mary was commanded to Moses by the LORD, the one True God of Israel, back in Leviticus, chapter 12, for mothers who have just given birth.
> **She shall continue for thirty-three days in the blood of her purifying. She shall not touch anything holy, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying are completed. … And when the days of her purifying are completed, whether for a son or for a daughter, she shall bring to the priest at the entrance of the tent of meeting a lamb a year old for a burnt offering, and a pigeon or a turtledove for a sin offering, and he shall offer it before the LORD and make atonement for her. Then she shall be clean from the flow of her blood. This is the law for her who bears a child, either male or female. And if she cannot afford a lamb, then she shall take two turtledoves or two pigeons, one for a burnt offering and the other for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be clean.**  (Lev. 12:4, 6–8)

Did you notice? Here we have a concrete detail about the finances of Joseph and Mary: they can't afford a lamb so their income must be in the "two turtledoves or a pair of pigeons" (Luke 2:24) bracket. *\[Humor]*  (That's enough to get you in the mood for tax season.) But the sacrifice of the birds is made so that Mary is now *ritually clean* after giving birth to her Son. Ritual cleanness is a huge part of the Law of Moses; ritual cleanness means you are now clean enough to be allowed to come into the temple and offer your sacrifice.

Which raises a question: since Mary comes to the temple to do what she needs to do according to the Law of Moses, should not Christian women today go to the temple in Jerusalem to do the same? The answer is No—there is no record that I know of that Christian mothers after Mary ever went to the temple to be purified from childbirth by this sacrifice prescribed in the Law of Moses—not even a hint of Christian mothers ever doing this.

*\[Transition]*  As we wrestle with this question we can do no better than … turn to Scripture, of course. \[Understatement] If God tell us something in His Word, we do well to listen. What are some things God tells us about sacrifice? Our Epistle reading comes to us from the book of Hebrews, and Hebrews, chapter 10 has a great passage.
> **By that will \[of God] we have been sanctified through the offering of** ***the body of Jesus Christ once for all*. And every priest stands daily at his service, offering repeatedly the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins. But when Christ had offered for all time** ***a single sacrifice for sins*, he sat down at the right hand of God, waiting from that time until his enemies should be made a footstool for his feet. For** ***by a single offering he has perfected for all time those who are being sanctified*.**  (Heb. 10:10–14)

Belovèd in the Lord, never forget that this is in the Bible. *\[Humor]*  Just count your toes and turn to the book of Hebrews. I need not beat it into you. The Holy Spirit ever remind us all of what our Lord came to do: *\[Crucifixion]*  He took on our flesh so He could be sacrificed on the Cross bearing our sins. And as we just heard, His one sacrifice for our sins perfected for all time you and me and anyone else who believes, "Jesus died on the Cross bearing *my* sins. Thank you, Lord Jesus!" All who believe in Him are fully forgiven and rise with Him, for " **THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY IN ISRAEL.** " We rise through faith in Him, both today by *\[font]*  living the new life promised to us in our Baptism and in the life to come at the resurrection of our mortal bodies to immortality (Rom. 6:4).

*\[Transition]*  But who are those who will fall? And what about the temple? Remember that both the Presentation of our Lord and the Purification of Mary happen at the temple at Jerusalem, where He will impress the teachers as a twelve-year-old. But as an adult, \[Baptism] after His Baptism, He will enrage again and again the Sadducees and Pharisees who are constantly found … at the temple.

Again, we can do no better than … turn to Scripture, of course. And now we turn to our Lord's direct teaching in *\[Sermon on the Mount]*  the Sermon on the Mount, where our Lord Jesus declares,
> **Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them** ***but to fulfill them*. For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished. Therefore whoever relaxes one of the least of these commandments and teaches others to do the same will be called least in the kingdom of heaven, but whoever does them and teaches them will be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I tell you, unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, you will never enter the kingdom of heaven.**  (Matt. 5:17–20)

And take note what will happen at the temple at the moment of the sacrifice of Christ on the Cross.




**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Our Epistle lesson


\[14] Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, \[15] and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery. \[16] For surely it is not angels that he helps, but he helps the offspring of Abraham. \[17] Therefore he had to be made like his brothers in every respect, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the service of God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people. \[18] For because he himself has suffered when tempted, he is able to help those who are being tempted. (Heb. 2:14–18)

Johannes Agricola was an antinomian. Here’s [an article about his error](https://www.1517.org/articles/johannes-agricola-and-the-distinction-between-law-and-gospel).

Holy Gospel:
\[39] And when they had performed everything according to the Law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.

The temple itself is to be fulfilled.

John 4:21–24
\[21] Jesus said to her, “Woman, believe me, the hour is coming when neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem will you worship the Father. \[22] You worship what you do not know; we worship what we know, for salvation is from the Jews. \[23] But the hour is coming, and is now here, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father is seeking such people to worship him. \[24] God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.” (ESV)