---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 1, 2026
title: WHO SWEARS TO HIS OWN HURT
occasion: 4th Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Mi. 6:1-8
  - Ps. 15
  - 1 Cor. 1:18-31
  - Matt. 5:1-12
sermon_text: Ps. 15
bible_version: ESV
---

# WHO SWEARS TO HIS OWN HURT

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, grant us Your Holy Spirit so that by Your Word and faith in Your Son, Jesus, we are ever welcome in Your presence. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have in Psalm 15 a short and sweet psalm of David where we confess the way of living our daily life that is pleasing to God.
> **O LORD, who shall sojourn in Your tent? Who shall dwell on Your holy hill?**

This is the first verse and title of the psalm: **"O LORD, who shall sojourn in your tent?"**  And right away we know the purpose of the psalm: who is pleasing to the Lord? Let's pray about it. Whom does He welcome into His presence? Let's hear from His own lips whom He welcomes in His holy presence. After all, who do you like to be around? Some people more than others. The Lord is the same way: there are some who He likes to be near, and others *\[understatement]*  not so much.

Now though the long psalms, like Psalm 119, are as much God's Word as the short ones, the short ones are easy to remember — they stick to us easily — and this particular psalm, Psalm 15 — five verses in all — is a good one. Keep this simple psalm in our hearts all day long and we *cannot* go wrong.

The psalm continues, **"He who walks blamelessly and does what is right and speaks truth in his heart."**  Belovèd in the Lord, God is watching us 24/7, and not only when we're doing good. We are told throughout the Bible that the Lord sees our hearts and knows exactly what we're doing. We can look to Psalm 19:
> **Who can discern his errors? Declare me innocent from hidden faults.**  (Ps. 19:12)

The Lord sees our hidden faults — our secret sins are laid bare. **"Who can discern his errors?"**  Which of us are even *able* to know that we're sinning? God knows — He sees everything. **"Declare me innocent from hidden faults."**  This we pray every time we pray the Lord's Prayer: **"And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive those who trespass against us."**

Now let us get back to Psalm 15:
> **O LORD, who shall sojourn in your tent? … He who walks blamelessly and does what is right and speaks truth in his heart.**

With the Lord there is truth and there is falsehood — the Bible is clear. It's not "You have your truth and I have my truth," which many believe. With the Lord there is truth and error, and there is no end to the error the devil invents to deceive us (John 8:44). Idols, we are told in the Bible, are not simply the imagination of man but the work of demons (Deut. 32:17). The end of error will finally be when Satan is thrown in the lake of fire (Rev. 20:10). Until then, he's been thrown down to the earth and he knows his time is short (Rev. 12:12).

Belovèd in the Lord, we are expressly told in the Bible that Jesus is the Truth:
> **I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through Me.**  (John 14:6)

This verse, no doubt, comes to mind for many of you, and thank God it does! Maybe this passage from Hebrews, chapter 4 also comes to mind: **"The Word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints and of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart"**  (Heb. 4:12). Belovèd in the Lord, we have been given the Bible by inspiration of the Holy Spirit so that the thoughts and intentions of our hearts can even be discerned — the Holy Spirit works through what God has said to do what is otherwise impossible: to discern the thoughts and intentions of our hearts, to confess our sin before God and believe *\[Crucifixion]*  that all is forgiven for Jesus' sake. **"No creature is hidden from his sight, but all are naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must give account"**  (Heb. 4:13).

We're drawing from the Bible but let us get back to Psalm 15: **"who does not slander with his tongue and does no evil to his neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his friend."**  By the grace of the Holy Spirit we guard our tongues and honor the Eighth Commandment: **"You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor."**  And in Psalm 34 we pray, **"Keep your tongue from evil and your lips from speaking deceit"**  (Ps. 34:13).

We pray next verse in Psalm 15, **"in whose eyes a vile person is despised, but who honors those who fear the LORD,"**  and we're almost done. We hear in Ephesians, chapter 5,
> **Take no part in the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead expose them. For it is shameful even to speak of the things that they do in secret.**  (Eph. 5:11–12)

But next in Psalm 15, we quickly pray, **"WHO SWEARS TO HIS OWN HURT and does not change."**  Belovèd in the Lord, let us pause and dwell on **"WHO SWEARS TO HIS OWN HURT and does not change."**  "Why should I put myself in a position of disadvantage? If I say I'll do something but the circumstances change so that I can see that I'm going to get hurt, I want to get out." Yet we pray in the psalm, "\[He] does *not* change."

And so, belovèd in the Lord, I invite you to connect this verse in Psalm 15 with *\[Gethsemane]*  our Lord Jesus praying in the Garden of Gethsemane. The Bible does not tell us that our Lord Jesus was praying Psalm 15 in the garden, but we are told that He prayed thus:
> **Abba, Father, all things are possible for You. Remove this cup from Me. Yet not what I will, but what You will.**  (Mark 14:36)

*This cup* is not the cup of Holy Communion, which is given to us gently for the forgiveness of our sins. First our forgiveness had to be won — Christ did not turn away but worked our salvation on the Cross, suffering enormously as He bore our sin, drinking from the cup of His Father's wrath against *our* sin. You and I, belovèd in the Lord, are the ones He saves. Remember that our Lord prayed to His own hurt, and He did not change.
> **who does not put out his money at interest and does not take a bribe against the innocent. He who does these things shall never be moved.**

Belovèd in the Lord, that's the whole psalm that keep us safe 24/7. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Hebrews 11:6
\[6] And without faith it is impossible to please him, for whoever would draw near to God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him. (ESV)