---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 26, 2025
title: TODAY THIS SCRIPTURE HAS BEEN FULFILLED IN YOUR HEARING.
occasion: 3rd Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Neh. 8:1-3, 5-6, 8-10
  - 1 Cor. 12:12-31a
  - Luke 4:16-30
sermon_text: Luke 4:16-30
bible_version: ESV
---

# TODAY THIS SCRIPTURE HAS BEEN FULFILLED IN YOUR HEARING.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Open our ears and our hearts, Holy Spirit, to hear who Jesus is and what He does for us. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, grace, peace, and *kind words* be to you from our Lord Jesus Christ. Who are you? Are you a man, woman, boy, or girl? Are you tall or short? Do you have black hair or brown hair or red hair or blond(e) hair? There's a lot to ask because there's a lot to know about you. But the Bible teaches us that the one thing that God wants to know about each of us that is of utmost importance is … you already know … what really matters to Him is *what's in our heart*. Do we worship Him or do we worship an idol? **"This people honors me with their lips,**  ***but their heart is far from me*; in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men"**  (Matt. 15:8–9). God knows our hearts and wants them for Himself very much.

We are also well-aware that what's in our heart dictates what we say. And, God forbid, what we say can defile us, as our Lord Jesus teaches us in Matthew, chapter 15.
> ***What comes out of the mouth proceeds from the heart*, and this defiles a person. For out of the heart come evil thoughts, murder, adultery, sexual immorality, theft, false witness, slander. These are what defile a person. But to eat with unwashed hands does not defile anyone.**  (Matt. 15:18–20)

So, what we speak reveals to others, and to God, what's in our hearts.

But there is also another side to this coin: *we become the words that we hear*. In our Holy Gospel we rejoice that in His home town of Nazareth **all spoke well of \[Jesus] and marveled at the gracious Words that were coming from His mouth**. His are the Words we want to hear; His gracious Words are surely what we want to hear. We will become these Words if we hear them and believe them.

*\[Transition]*  But what if we do *not* hear His gracious Words? What if we do not hear anything *at all*? *\[Illustration]*  I'm brushing off a sermon illustration from fifteen years ago. There was hundreds of years ago a monk, who was also o historian, who lived and wrote in *Parma*—not the town next door but in Parma, *Italy*. His name was Salimbene of Parma. He reports an infamous experiment conducted by the Holy Roman Emperor Frederick II. Frederick reigned in the thirteenth century—that's from 1220 to 1250 A.D. During his reign, the Crusader army actually captured Jerusalem, and Frederick styled himself as Jerusalem's Christian king.

Salimbene of Parma reports that an experiment on the emperor's authority was once conducted on *a group of infants*. The experiment was designed to answer this particular question: if no one speaks with the infants—if they do not hear a word spoken by anyone—what language will they speak? Will they speak Hebrew? Will they speak the native language of their birth mother? Emperor Frederick wanted to know and he authorized the experiment.

He ordered nurses to suckle, bathe, and wash the infants—but don't speak to them! … *\[Ask]*  Well, how do you think this experiment turned out? … *The infants died*—what a horrible experiment! By the way, this kind of curiosity did not end with Frederick. Researchers in Wisconsin tried the same approach in the 70's with newborn rhesus monkeys, putting them in isolation chambers for up to one year. The poor things eventually stopped moving and huddled in the corner. The scientific approach can be horrible.

But we have laid before us today that *if no words are ever spoken to us, we are nobody*. But we, belovèd in the Lord, by the grace of God, are all somebody—somebody has spoken to us and, by the grace of the Holy Spirit, we are very much enlivened *by hearing the name of Jesus*—who He is, both God and man—and what He's done for us, saved us from our sins. These Words, the Gospel, make us *very much* alive. *\[Font]*  And on this note we cherish our Baptism, where God has spoken in His name and the Gospel of His Son on this water, and then washed us with this holy water for the forgiveness of our sins and the imparting of the Holy Spirit into our hearts (Acts 2:38). Talk about God's Word making us alive! We are very alive in the name of Jesus. Alleluia!

Now let us settle on this: the words that we hear become, to a great extent, who we are. Without any words we shrivel up and die. But the value and importance of hearing *good* words—hearing *holy* words—hearing *Christ's own Words*—the value of Christ's Word is immense. In addition to the words, add some experiences, and—well, look around—here we are. Each of us is very much the product of the things we've been through and the words we've heard. (What about the deaf? They hear their words through sign language.)

\[Transition] Now we hear from the Holy Gospel, **"All spoke well of \[Jesus] and marveled at the gracious Words that were coming from His mouth."**  Let us look not only to this day, but to the testimony of Luke's Gospel—let's look ahead to chapter 5—concerning the gracious Words we hear from the mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ.
> **\[Jesus] said to Simon \[Peter], "Put out into the deep and let down your nets for a catch"**  (Luke 5:4).

These are kind words, for Peter caught a lot of fish.
> **Jesus stretched out his hand and touched \[the leper], saying, "I will; be clean." And immediately the leprosy left him.**  (Luke 5:13)

These are kind words, for the leper was healed.
> **When \[Jesus] saw \[the faith of the paralyzed man and his friends], He said, "Man, your sins are forgiven you."**  (Luke 5:20)

And these are kind words, too, for not only is the paralyzed man healed, but his friends and the crowd—yea, all who hear this declaration from the Bible from Jesus' lips—all who believe He has the authority to forgive sins and believes His Word—Alleluia!—all is forgiven and forgotten. These are beyond kind word
* this is the Word that saves us from paralysis: **"Your sins are forgiven you."**
* this is the Word that saves us from sin: **"Your sins are forgiven you."**
* this is the Word that saves us from death: **"Your sins are forgiven you."**
* this is the Word that saves us from hell: **"Your sins are forgiven you."**

Christ's Word, when we believe it, *has the power*. Alleluia!

For, back in His hometown of Nazareth, or Lord reads to the people who know Him best from the prophecy of Isaiah, chapter 61.
> **The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to proclaim good news to the poor. He has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty those who are oppressed, to proclaim the year of the Lord's favor.**

These are the kindest Words that can be spoken to us—Words of not only kindness but Words of Christ's authority and performative power. And to this Christ adds, " **TODAY THIS SCRIPTURE HAS BEEN FULFILLED IN YOUR HEARING.**  I am here for you, as the Scriptures testify."

Only let us not regard Him lightly and send Him out of town.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
ZZZ
### Titus
Galatians 2:3
\[3] But even **Titus**, who was with me, was not forced to be circumcised, though he was a Greek. (ESV)

2 Corinthians 2:12–13
\[12] When I came to Troas to preach the gospel of Christ, even though a door was opened for me in the Lord, \[13] my spirit was not at rest because I did not find my brother Titus there. So I took leave of them and went on to Macedonia. (ESV)

2 Corinthians 7:5–10
\[5] For even when we came into Macedonia, our bodies had no rest, but we were afflicted at every turn—fighting without and fear within. \[6] But God, who comforts the downcast, comforted us by the coming of **Titus**, \[7] and not only by his coming but also by the comfort with which he was comforted by you, as he told us of your longing, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced still more. \[8] For even if I made you grieve with my letter, I do not regret it—though I did regret it, for I see that that letter grieved you, though only for a while. \[9] As it is, I rejoice, not because you were grieved, but because you were grieved into repenting. For you felt a godly grief, so that you suffered no loss through us.
\[10] For godly grief produces a repentance that leads to salvation without regret, whereas worldly grief produces death. (ESV)

2 Timothy 4:9–12
\[9] Do your best to come to me soon. \[10] For Demas, in love with this present world, has deserted me and gone to Thessalonica. Crescens has gone to Galatia, **Titus** to Dalmatia. \[11] Luke alone is with me. Get Mark and bring him with you, for he is very useful to me for ministry. \[12] Tychicus I have sent to Ephesus. (ESV)