---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: May 4, 2025
title: DRAGGING THE NET FULL OF FISH
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Easter
readings:
  - Acts 9:1-22
  - Rev. 5:1-14
  - John 21:1-19
sermon_text: John 21:1-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# DRAGGING THE NET FULL OF FISH

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us Holy Spirit, that we be dragged ashore to believe in Jesus, our living Savior. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! My message for you today focuses on the third appearance of our risen Lord to His disciples: the miraculous catch of 153 fish and the restoration of Peter. What a comfort it is that our Lord Jesus is happy to forgive us, even when we have denied Him three times.

Nevertheless, let us also remember this stern warning from our Lord's lips: **"I tell you, everyone who acknowledges Me before men, the Son of Man also will acknowledge before the angels of God, but the one who denies Me before men will be denied before the angels of God"**  (Luke 12:8–9). And Peter did deny our Lord three times on the night when He was betrayed by Judas. Peter’s denial hangs over him. Let us hear again exactly how it happened that St. Peter, the great apostle, denied his Lord three times on that terrible night.
> **Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did another disciple. Since that disciple was known to the high priest, he entered with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest, but Peter stood outside at the door. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the servant girl who kept watch at the door, and brought Peter in. The servant girl at the door said to Peter, "You also are not one of this Man's disciples,** ***are you*?" He said,**  *\[one finger]*  **"I am not." … Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. So they said to him, "You also are not one of His disciples,** ***are you*?” He denied it and said** *\[two fingers]* **, "I am not." One of the servants of the high priest, a relative of the man whose ear Peter had cut off, asked, "Did I not see you in the garden with him?" Peter again** *\[three fingers]*  **denied it, and at once a rooster crowed.**  (John 18:15–17, 25–27)

We still hear roosters crow from time to time. Let this be a reminder that we not deny as Peter did. He is faithful and will keep us to the end.

Here Peter stands, denied before the angels of God for his denial of Jesus. If there was ever anyone who was guilty before God and deserving of His righteous wrath and punishment, Peter is the man and this is the moment. What is most powerful in this account is what is *not* said. The Holy Spirit has directed *\[St. John statue]*  St. John the Evangelist to write *not one syllable of judgment* upon Peter in this passage. This is all we hear at the fish breakfast:
> **When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, "Simon, son of John, do you love Me more than these?" \[Peter] said to Him, "Yes, Lord; You know that I love You." He said to him, "Feed my lambs."**

" **Do you love Me**, Peter?" is all our Lord says to publicly acknowledge Peter's sin—remember, all the disciples are listening. Peter has demonstrated publicly that he does not love Jesus—he has denied Him three times. Now, the apostle who had denied his Lord answers, **"Yes, Lord; You know that I love You."**  Peter is not lying, but if he were, would not our Lord know? For **"\[Jesus] needed no one to bear witness about man, for He Himself knew what was in man"**  (John 2:25). Our Lord tells Peter, **"Feed my lambs."**  Does Jesus tell Peter straight up, "I forgive you"? Not here, *\[Crucifixion]*  but He already did at the Cross: **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do"**  (Luke 23:34a). All is forgiven at the Cross.

All is forgiven at the Cross and Peter understands it—the Lord has read Peter's heart and knows that he believes it. But it's about to get uncomfortable.
> **\[Jesus] said to \[Peter] a second time, "Simon, son of John, do you love Me?" He said to Him, "Yes, Lord; you know that I love you." He said to him, "Tend my sheep." He said to him the third time, "Simon, son of John, do you love me?" Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, "Do you love me?" and he said to him, "Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you." Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep."**

This is one of the times in the Bible where we see the number three and think of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit at work through our Baptism. Asking Peter **"Do you love me?"**  three times is not a rebuke of Peter, but a peaceful assurance of forgiveness along with the admonition to **go, and sin no more** (John 8:11).

Belovèd in the Lord, Peter is forgiven and restored to Christ's service in *the most gentle way*. Forgiveness is won by the Christ who lives; it is never earned. We need only turn from our sin and believe it.

*\[Transition]*  How is it that Peter has been restored to faith in Jesus when he has denied Him three times? Has he come to his senses? Not so much. He hid in fear with the other disciples (John 20:19). Did he believe the report of the women that Christ had risen? No, he thought it was an idle tale (Luke 24:11). What does it take for Peter to be restored? What it takes is for the risen Christ to go find him Himself!

We turn our attention to the miraculous catch of the 153 fish off the right side of the boat. As Peter drags the fish ashore in a net we are reminded of what our Lord has said: **"Follow me, and I will make you fishers of men"**  (Matt. 4:19). The fish in the net represent all of us, a multitude of sinners who are brought to saving faith in Jesus like DRAGGING THE NET FULL OF FISH. Do we swim out of the water? Do we grow legs and walk to Jesus? No. By the Lord's command a net is cast and He must direct us to swim into that net. That net is cast by preachers—it is cast by the preaching of the Law, that we fear the punishment of our sins, and the swee Gospel, that forgiveness is won for us by Christ who died for our sins and lives. That Word is the tool of the Spirit to *work* faith in us—to drag us from our unbelief to belief in our Lord Jesus and be saved, for **the natural person does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him, and he is not able to understand them because they are spiritually discerned** (1 Cor. 2:14).
> **No one can come to Me unless the Father who sent me drags him. And I will raise him up on the last day.**  (John 6:44, own translation)

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Acts 9:1
\[1] But Saul, still breathing threats and murder against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest (ESV)

Saul was definitely dragged.