---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 19, 2026
title: I WILL WALK BEFORE THE LORD IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING.
occasion: 3rd Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 2:14a, 36-41
  - Ps. 116
  - 1 Pet. 1:17-25
  - Luke 24:13-35
sermon_text: Ps. 116
bible_version: ESV
---

# I WILL WALK BEFORE THE LORD IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, gracious Father, with faith in Your Son, that we also live. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Cleopas and the other disciple walk on the road to Emmaus on *the* Sunday our Lord Jesus was raised from the dead. This is today's Holy Gospel. Two weeks ago we celebrated the Resurrection of our Lord in fine fashion — everyone knew what was going on, everyone knew where to be, everyone knew what to say: Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!

But Cleopas and the other disciple are not so sure.
> **That very day two of them were going to a village named Emmaus, about seven miles from Jerusalem, and they were talking with each other about all these things that had happened. While they were talking and discussing together, Jesus Himself drew near and went with them.**  (Luke 24:13–15)

Cleopas and the other disciple, whose name we do not know, are walking and talking about the reports they have heard that Christ has risen. They may be optimistic, but they are not quite sure that Christ has risen. Little do they know that they are walking *right next to* our risen Lord — if they only knew who it is that walks next to them, they would be quite sure Christ has risen. So here they are — not so sure, walking right next to the living Christ — and here we are — quite sure He's risen, waiting for Him to return from heaven to judge the living and the dead. Little do Cleopas and the other disciple know that they are walking in person next to the living Christ. However, our risen Lord Jesus chooses not to reveal Himself to them till they are settling down for the evening after their walk to Emmaus.
> **So \[Jesus] went in to stay with them. When He was at table with them, He took the bread and blessed and broke it and gave it to them. And their eyes were opened, and they recognized Him. And He vanished from their sight.**  (Luke 24:29b–31)

But before Christ opens their eyes at the breaking of the bread, our Holy Gospel tells us, **"Beginning with Moses and all the Prophets, \[Jesus] interpreted to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself"**  (Luke 24:27). This verse states that Jesus interprets, one passage after another, **in all the Scriptures**, the things written about Him. This must be the greatest Old Testament instruction imaginable. Could not the Holy Spirit have inspired Luke to write down for us that lesson, word-for-word? We do realize how much trouble there is in the Church over one person who interprets the Bible one way and another person who interprets it another. We read in the Bible of Christ's temptation in the wilderness, where Satan is quick to offer false interpretations (Luke 4:1–13). If we had Christ's lesson to Cleopas and the other disciple written down for us, we'd have a lengthy list of passages that we could point to and say, "See? This is how our Lord interprets the passage."

Be that as it may, I believe the Holy Spirit could have surely inspired Luke to write out that instruction for us, but expressly chose not to. I believe we are also given the answer why this is so in the book of Acts, chapter 17, where it is written,
> **The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night** ***to Berea*, and when they arrived they went into the Jewish synagogue. Now these Jews were more noble than those in Thessalonica; they received the Word with all eagerness,**  ***examining the Scriptures daily to see if these things were so*. Many of them therefore believed, with not a few Greek women of high standing as well as men.**  (Acts 17:10–12)

Belovèd in the Lord, we have been given the Scriptures to examine daily and we have been given the Spirit to interpret (John 14:26). That is enough — the Spirit also raises up teachers in the Church (1 Cor. 12:28) — the Scriptures are able to make us wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus (2 Tim. 3:15). And our Lord bless us to nobly continue to examine the Scriptures daily, and the Spirit continue to enlighten our Bible studies. We can do no better than the Bereans.

*\[Transition]*  The Scriptures testify of Christ and they testify of *life*. We all want to live. Our Lord even expressly says, and we'll hear it again in next week's Holy Gospel, **"I came that they may have life and have it abundantly"**  (John 10:10b). We also have before us today's psalm: **"I love the LORD, because He has heard my voice and my pleas for mercy."**  Thank You, Lord, for hearing our prayers and helping us in our need. Though we do not deserve Your kindness, You are nevertheless merciful and kind to us in Christ Jesus. A basic need for which many pray is simply this: "Lord, I want to live." This is the prayer before surgery. This is the prayer during an illness. This is the prayer in danger. "Lord, I want to live."

*\[Illustration]*  For example — wouldn't you know? — I know of three pastors who at one time were in danger of dying who prayed, "Lord, I want to live. If you let me live I'll be a minister." One was Pastor Schuette at Unity — he was ill and prayed that the Lord spare his life. Another was Chaplain Bauer, Trina's and my pastor at University Lutheran Church in Champaign, Illinois — he was fighting the Germans and prayed that the Lord spare his life. Another was Father Vello Salo, an Estonian — he was fighting the Russians and prayed that the Lord spare his life. He became a Catholic priest.

When our lives are in danger, let us turn to our psalm:
> **The snares of death encompassed me; the pangs of Sheol laid hold on me; I suffered distress and anguish. Then I called on the name of the LORD: "O LORD, I pray, deliver my soul!"**

We simply want to live and pray that the Lord let us live to see another day. And thank You, Lord, for this day we have today, to do those good works that You have prepared beforehand, that we should walk in them (Eph. 2:10)!

Turning again to our psalm, we pray, **"For you have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from stumbling; I WILL WALK BEFORE THE LORD IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING."**  In this psalm we pray just as Job confessed,
> **I know that my Redeemer lives, and at the last He will stand upon the earth. And after my skin has been thus destroyed, yet in my flesh I shall see God.**  (Job 19:25–26)

Belovèd in the Lord, we yearn to be in the physical presence of the living Christ, whether in heaven, after our flesh is destroyed, or here, where our flesh is weak and dying. Our flesh is weak and dying, but help us, Holy Spirit, that it never be so with our faith!

And to strengthen our faith, belovèd in the Lord, I invite you to consider that Cleopas and the other disciple did not know that they were in the presence of the living Christ till *\[altar]*  **He took the bread and blessed and broke it and gave it to them**. Christ could have revealed Himself earlier, but expressly chose this moment. For He has told us of this bread, **"This is My body"**  — Christ's living body is present here and we receive His living body with our lips. Holy Communion is a celebration of the Resurrection of our Lord's body. Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! We receive His risen body not only with our lips, but also with our hearts, believing what He has said: **"given and shed for you for the forgiveness of sins."**  With our sins forgiven, we live another day; with our sins forgiven, we live forever; with our sins forgiven,we are at peace. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes

Psalm 116:9
\[9] I will walk before the LORD
in the land of the living. (ESV)

Luke 24:30–31
\[30] When he was at table with them, he took the bread and blessed and broke it and gave it to them. \[31] And their eyes were opened, and they recognized him. And he vanished from their sight. (ESV)

Luke 24:35
\[35] Then they told what had happened on the road, and how he was known to them in the breaking of the bread. (ESV)

Luke 24:44–49
\[44] Then he said to them, “These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you, that everything written about me in the Law of Moses and the Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled.” \[45] Then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures, \[46] and said to them, “Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer and on the third day rise from the dead, \[47] and that repentance for the forgiveness of sins should be proclaimed in his name to all nations, beginning from Jerusalem. \[48] You are witnesses of these things. \[49] And behold, I am sending the promise of my Father upon you. But stay in the city until you are clothed with power from on high.” (ESV)

Acts 2:38–40
\[38] And Peter said to them, “Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. \[39] For the promise is for you and for your children and for all who are far off, everyone whom the Lord our God calls to himself.” \[40] And with many other words he bore witness and continued to exhort them, saying, “Save yourselves from this crooked generation.” (ESV)

Acts 3:15
\[15] and you killed the Author of life, whom God raised from the dead. To this we are witnesses. (ESV)

April 25 is the Feast of St. Mark, Evangelist.

Matt. 11:28

Matt. 9:12

2 Cor. 12:9

Rom. 14:1–3

John 3:15

I WILL WALK BEFORE THE LORD IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING. I'm getting out of this alive in the name of Jesus. I'm getting out of this alive in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead.