---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 18, 2025
title: FORGIVENESS FINISHED
occasion: 67nd Sunday after the Sabbath
readings:
  - (1) Luke 23:32-37
  - (2) Luke 23:38-43
  - (3) John 19:25-27
  - (4) Matt. 27:45-46
  - (5) John 19:28-29
  - (6) John 19:30
  - (7) Luke 23:44-47
sermon_text: John 19:30
bible_version: ESV
---

# FORGIVENESS FINISHED

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank you Lord Jesus, for working for us our full forgiveness. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, the world is full of grudges. See any grudges? See any irritated people? Anyone dying? People are dying by the thousands for grudges. Grudges make for hell on earth.

Now if I told you that all grudges were gone, would you believe me? … If I said, " **It is finished**—no one holds a grudge anymore," would you consider it? … *\[Understatement]*  The world would be a much better place if it were true. But you would be right to ask me, "Who got rid of the grudges?"

We are told about Joseph in the Bible. His brothers held grudges against him.
> **Joseph, being seventeen years old, was pasturing the flock with his brothers. He was a boy with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah, his father's wives. And Joseph brought a bad report of them to their father**\[, Jacob]. (Gen. 37:2b)

That's the first grudge: Joseph was a tattle-tale.
> **Now Israel loved Joseph more than any other of his sons, because he was the son of his old age. And he made him a robe of many colors. But when his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers, they hated him and could not speak peacefully to him.**  (Gen. 37:3–4)

That's the second grudge: "Dad loves this snitch more than he loves us." The third grudge is that Joseph dreamed that his brothers bowed to him. He saw these dreams and told them about it (Gen. 37:5–11). See any grudges? See any irritated people? Anyone dying? Not yet.
> **\[The brothers] saw \[Joseph] from afar, and before he came near to them they conspired against him to kill him. They said to one another, "Here comes this dreamer. Come now, let us kill him and throw him into one of the pits. Then we will say that a fierce animal has devoured him, and we will see what will become of his dreams."**  (Gen. 37:18–20)

Thankfully the brothers ultimately did not kill Joseph, but sold him instead to slave traders (Gen. 37:26–28). And now *Joseph* has reason to hold a grudge.

You probably know this story well. Can you see the grudges multiply? Years later, and through all kinds of circumstances, Joseph stands before his brothers again. Joseph has saved Pharaoh from famine and Pharaoh has promoted him to the second most powerful man in Egypt. Joseph's brothers have come to Egypt looking for food because Jacob, the father, has heard that there is food for sale in Egypt (Gen. 42:1). In a little while Jacob and his sons all move to Egypt to be with Josph. But when Jacob dies, Joseph's brothers fear revenge: **"When Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, 'It may be that Joseph will hate us and pay us back for all the evil that we did to him' "**  (Gen. 50:15).

It is hard not to identify with Joseph's brothers. We hold grudges. We share their guilt. We share their sin. Our jealousy and hatred of others is not so different from theirs. Watch Joseph's brothers, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, and Zebulun come up with another bad idea. They stand before Joseph, fearing punishment, and say to him, **"Behold, we are your servants"**  (Gen. 50:18b). *They have gone wrong in their quest for forgiveness.*  The brothers are trying to bargain, trying to cut a deal, trying to do something to get out of the punishment they deserve. And we do it, too. We vow to make things right and work our way back into the good graces of the person we've sinned against. We are deluded to think we can clean up our own mess and earn our forgiveness.

*\[Transition]*  Joseph will have none of it. Hear him declare the source of all forgiveness:
> **Do not fear,** ***for am I in the place of God*? As for you, you meant evil against me,** ***but God meant it for good*, to bring it about that many people should be kept alive, as they are today.**  (Gen. 50:19b–20)

Belovèd in the Lord, this Good News is never delivered to us so plainly as on this day, Good Friday. On this day, the good that God intended transcends the sin of man. *\[Crucifixion]*  Belovèd in the Lord, behold the Cross and see it plainly! Men, deluded by Satan, intended Christ's Cross for evil. They wanted to kill the Son of God! They lied. They gave false testimony. They perverted justice to engineer the execution of the Son of God. But—behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!— God worked it for our good, that we would stand, like Joseph's brothers, plainly forgiven and saved from death, and that's all there is to it. Believe it and relax—we are at peace with God.

Belovèd in the Lord, *forgiveness is finished* as Christ declares from His Cross. He bore our punishment and holds no grudge against us. Though we are indebted to Him, let us cast away all thought of needing to somehow pay Him back. There is nothing to pay; we should only be thankful. What's right is that we believe that Christ was crucified under Pontius Pilate to bear our sins and win our forgiveness. **"It is finished."**  There is no grudge between God and man.

\[Conclusion] Take note that Joseph goes out of his way to demonstrate to his brothers that his forgiveness is real:
> **"Do not fear; I will provide for you and your little ones." Thus he comforted \[his brothers] and spoke kindly to them.**  (Gen. 50:21)

In the same way our Lord Jesus puts Himself forward as our Good Shepherd to feed us and care for us and to keep the wolf away. But to remove all doubt about our forgiveness, *\[font]*  He washes each of us and *\[altar]*  feeds us regularly with His own body and blood. Christ has won our forgiveness. **"It is finished."**

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
I have lifted main idead and parts of this sermon from *Forgiveness Finished*, *Concordia Pulpit Resources* (Vol. 32, Part 2) 61–62.

Unjust death of a very good man.

Genesis 50:15–21
\[15] When Joseph’s brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, “It may be that Joseph will hate us and pay us back for all the evil that we did to him.” \[16] So they sent a message to Joseph, saying, “Your father gave this command before he died: \[17] ‘Say to Joseph, “Please forgive the transgression of your brothers and their sin, because they did evil to you.”’ And now, please forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of your father.” Joseph wept when they spoke to him. \[18] His brothers also came and fell down before him and said, “Behold, we are your servants.” \[19] But Joseph said to them, “Do not fear, for am I in the place of God? \[20] As for you, you meant evil against me, but God meant it for good, to bring it about that many people should be kept alive, as they are today. \[21] So do not fear; I will provide for you and your little ones.” Thus he comforted them and spoke kindly to them. (ESV)

Not only that but believing in Him *makes* us right.