---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 3, 2026
title: FATHER, INTO YOUR HANDS I COMMIT MY SPIRIT!
occasion: Good Friday
readings:
  - (1) Luke 23:32-37
  - (2) Luke 23:38-43
  - (3) John 19:25-27
  - (4) Matt. 27:45-46
  - (5) John 19:28-29
  - (6) John 19:30
  - (7) Luke 23:44-47
sermon_text: Ps. 31
bible_version: ESV
---

# FATHER, INTO YOUR HANDS I COMMIT MY SPIRIT!

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Grant us Your Spirit, gracious Father, to ever rejoice in the salvation that Your Son won for us. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, this night we remember one of *the* great events of human history. The sixth day of Creation is one of those events — on that day God made us — male and female He created us in His image (Gen. 1:27). Tonight, Good Friday, is another — on this day the Son of God redeemed us. And Pentecost will be another — on that day the Holy Spirit was poured out so that God came to dwell in the hearts of all who are redeemed by Jesus. Tonight is about our redemption, when the Son of God paid the price to purchase our freedom from slavery to sin, devil, and death (Heb. 2:15). "I believe in Jesus Christ, His only Son, our Lord, who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, *suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died and was buried*" this day.

Now to defeat the devil, Christ had to face him in battle. But Christ did that already when He was hungry and tempted by the devil in the wilderness for forty days (Matt. 4:1–11; Luke 4:1–13). Christ won that battle decisively, when time and again He responded to temptation with "It is written," and stuck to His Father's Word, as recorded in the Bible. Furthermore, let it be noted by all here tonight that God is faithful, and that we have been promised in the Bible that He will never let us be tempted beyond what we can bear, for He will always provide the way of escape, that we may be able to endure temptation (1 Cor. 10:13). We have Christ's example in the wilderness to keep the Word of God in our hearts, ready to be wielded against the devil. But Christ already overcame Satan in the wilderness. Why does He then have to face Him again and go to the Cross? He still has to go to the Cross because our ransom has not yet been paid: the precious blood of Jesus has to be shed to win our forgiveness and purchase our freedom from sin, devil, and death.

*\[Transition]*  And while He is redeeming us, shedding His holy, precious blood for us, the Bible tells us a few things about how our Lord gets the job done — what He endures to see our salvation through to the end. This is written for us to appreciate what He goes through to save us and to help us properly handle our own trials, when we bear those crosses that Jesus has promised us (Matt. 10:38). Our Lord Jesus redeeming us poor, miserable sinners is hard and miserable work, even beyond our understanding. But there is more going on than just Jesus and the devil, with us in the middle. For the Son is doing only that which *His Father* has given Him to do. *Our Lord sticks to His Father* the whole time. For we heard our Lord say in John, chapter 12,
> **I have not spoken on My own authority, but the Father who sent Me has Himself given Me a Commandment — what to say and what to speak. And I know that His Commandment is eternal life. What I say, therefore, I say as the Father has told Me.**  (John 12:49–50)

Every Word Jesus says is given to Him from His Father, whom from time to time Jesus calls His God, which is what we hear in the Fourth Word from the Cross: **"My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?"**  (Matt. 27:46) We have God the Son praying to God the Father. And as the Son speaks the Commandment that His Father gives Him, He also *obeys* His Father's Commandment perfectly — perfect obedience to His Father, for which we give Him thanks, because He is winning for us eternal life.

*\[Gethsemane]*  For we clearly see Christ obey His Father's Commandment at Gethsemane,
> **"Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from Me. Nevertheless, not My will, but Yours, be done." And there appeared to Him an angel from heaven, strengthening Him,**  (Luke 22:42–43)

much as it was in the wilderness against the devil, for there angels also strengthened Him (Mark 1:13). At this point we are given a picture of what Christ is going through as He obediently submits His will to His Father's. We are told of a change in His body: **"Being in agony He prayed more earnestly; and His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down to the ground"**  (Luke 22:44). Our Lord is in agony as He prays to His Father and His sweat turns to blood. *\[Understatement]*  That must be stress. Our Lord is stressed and He prays to His Father.

*\[Transition]*  He is praying. Is our Lord Jesus praying a little or a lot? I put my money on He is praying without ceasing (1 Thess. 5:17). We take note that as Christ works our redemption, He prays. In Gethsemane He prays to His Father. *\[Crucifixion]*  As He is mocked and crucified, the Bible strongly suggests that He prays the Psalms to His Father.

For we just heard our Lord's Fourth Word from the Cross: **"My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?"**  (Matt. 27:46) Jesus is utterly forsaken and alone when He bears our sins. His disciples have all fled (Mark 14:50). His earthly mother, though, does stand by the Cross (John 19:25). But to be forsaken by His heavenly Father is awful, and, again, it simply might be beyond our understanding. To have been without sin (Heb. 4:15), perfectly obedient to His Father, and then be forsaken by Him? Was the Father unfaithful to His Son? Never! *\[Crucifixion]*  But His Son does bear our sin — it is in our place and for our transgressions that He is forsaken by His Father. The Father forsakes His belovèd, perfectly obedient Son instead of forsaking us, to spare us from the worst loneliness imaginable.

It surely comes as no surprise to you that **"My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?"**  is not something we hear for the first time in the Bible when Christ is on the Cross. We just prayed it — it is a Psalm of David. I am convinced, and it is widely understood in Christendom, that, hanging on the Cross, our Lord is praying the psalm which is instantly recognized by its first verse: **"My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?"**  We note that this psalm not only describes details of our Lord's Crucifixion, but that it also ends in victory.

Could it be that our Lord Jesus also prayed *other psalms* as He bore our sins? I believe that is exactly what He did — that the Psalms were constantly on His lips and that He was strengthened by them to finish the job — to work through agony to win our salvation *\[Crucifixion]*  by His innocent suffering and death on the Cross. We can do no worse than our Lord Jesus Christ if we pray the Psalms constantly (John 14:12).

*\[Transition]*  Christ keeps praying and it is done — our salvation is won. **"It is finished"**  (John 19:30) — our Sixth Word from the Cross. We turn now to Christ's Seventh and final Word from the Cross: **"FATHER, INTO YOUR HANDS I COMMIT MY SPIRIT!"**  (Ps. 31:5; Luke 23:46) Forsaken by His Father for our sins, our Lord still prays to Him and trusts Him. *Our Lord sticks to His Father* the whole time. And — what do you know? — it appears that this Seventh and final Word comes to us again from the Psalms — another Psalm of David. This one begins with **"In you, O LORD, do I take refuge; let Me never be put to shame"**  — how appropriate. Not only is this a psalm to pray during our trials, but it is another psalm where again we see our Lord working our salvation.
> **For You are My rock and My fortress; and for Your name's sake You lead Me and guide Me; You take me out of the net they have hidden for Me, for You are My refuge. INTO YOUR HAND I COMMIT MY SPIRIT; You have redeemed Me, O LORD, faithful God.**

The Father has redeemed the Son for His obedience, and by His obedience we are redeemed from sin, devil, and death, as we hear from Hebrews, chapter 5,
> **In the days of His flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to Him who was able to save Him from death, and He was heard because of his reverence. Although He was a Son, He learned obedience through what He suffered. And being made perfect, He became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey Him, being designated by God a High Priest after the order of Melchizedek.**  (Heb. 5:7–10)

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
First Word: Luke 23:34
\[34] And Jesus said, “Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.” And they cast lots to divide his garments. (ESV)

Second Word: Luke 23:43
\[43] And he said to him, “Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in paradise.” (ESV)

Third Word: John 19:26–27
\[26] When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple whom he loved standing nearby, he said to his mother, “Woman, behold, your son!” \[27] Then he said to the disciple, “Behold, your mother!” And from that hour the disciple took her to his own home. (ESV)

Fourth Word: Matthew 27:46
\[46] And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out with a loud voice, saying, “Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?” that is, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?” (ESV)

Fifth Word: John 19:28
\[28] After this, Jesus, knowing that all was now finished, said (to fulfill the Scripture), “I thirst.” (ESV)

Sixth Word: John 19:30
\[30] When Jesus had received the sour wine, he said, “It is finished,” and he bowed his head and gave up his spirit. (ESV)

Seventh Word: Luke 23:46
\[46] Then Jesus, calling out with a loud voice, said, “Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!” And having said this he breathed his last. (ESV)

Psalm 37:22
\[22] for those blessed by the LORD shall inherit the land,
but those cursed by him shall be cut off. (ESV)

Psalm 135:15–18
\[15] The idols of the nations are silver and gold,
the work of human hands.
\[16] They have mouths, but do not speak;
they have eyes, but do not see;
\[17] they have ears, but do not hear,
nor is there any breath in their mouths.
\[18] Those who make them become like them;
so do all who trust in them. (ESV)

Isaiah 51:22
\[22] Thus says your Lord, the LORD,
your God who pleads the cause of his people:
“Behold, I have taken from your hand the cup of staggering;
the bowl of my wrath you shall drink no more; (ESV)

Matthew 10:38–39
\[38] And whoever does not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me. \[39] Whoever finds his life will lose it, and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it. (ESV)

1 Corinthians 1:18
\[18] For the word of the cross is folly to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is the power of God. (ESV)

Galatians 3:2
\[2] Let me ask you only this: Did you receive the Spirit by works of the law or by hearing with faith? (ESV)