---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 30, 2025
title: JOY BEFORE THE ANGELS, JOY BEFORE THE FATHER
occasion: 4th Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Is. 12
  - 2 Cor. 5:16-21
  - Luke 15:1-3, 11b-32
sermon_text: Luke 15:1-3, 11b-32
bible_version: ESV
---

# JOY BEFORE THE ANGELS, JOY BEFORE THE FATHER

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Thank you heavenly Father, for taking us back in Jesus' name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we're in the middle of Lent and today's theme is, believe it or not, *joy*. (I told you that Sundays in Lent are little Easters.) How often do we hear of the one lost sheep and the ninety-nine that are fine? The Good Shepherd leaves the ninety-nine unprotected in the open country and goes looking for the one that is lost. And, boy, is He happy over finding that single lost sheep! So we are told in the beginning of Luke, chapter 15. Next, we have the joy of the lost coin being found.
> **What woman, having ten silver coins, if she loses one coin, does not light a lamp and sweep the house and seek diligently until she finds it? And when she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, "Rejoice with me, for I have found the coin that I had lost." Just so, I tell you, there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner who repents.**  (Luke 15:8–10)

We are told of the JOY BEFORE THE ANGELS over one, just one, sinner who repents. Our repentance is precious and celebrated in heaven.

*\[Illustration]*  What if the Cavs go all the way? There will be a celebration in Cleveland; we already know what kind of a celebration that will be. What if the Guardians go all the way? What if the *Browns* go all they way? That would be such a big deal and you know what would happen. There would be joy all around.

But what would the Browns winning it all matter compared to one—just one—sinner who repents? On earth, one sinner who repents causes practically no celebration—maybe none. Either there is no one repenting or no one really cares. But God is underlining for us in Luke, chapter 15 by telling us over and over again that our repentance is what *He* cares about—He and all the angels of heaven care deeply about our repentance so much so that when we do—and we can do it every day—there is real celebration in heaven. We pray in the Communion liturgy, "Therefore with angels and archangels and with all the company of heaven we laud and magnify Your glorious name." This is a reflection not only of Christ's holy, bodily presence here among us *\[altar]*  in Holy Communion: it is a reflection of the joy in heaven over the fact that we have turned our back on our sin and have come to the altar to once again be joyfully fed by our Lord.

*\[Transition]*  So we are told about the joy before the angels over one sinner who repents. In today's Holy Gospel we are told about the joy before *the Father Himself* over one sinner who repents—JOY BEFORE THE ANGELS, JOY BEFORE *THE FATHER*.
> **There was a man who had two sons. And the younger of them said to his father, "Father, give me the share of property that is coming to me." And \[the father] divided his property between them.**

The younger son wants his money now. That's disrespectful! The father isn't even dead but the younger son wants his share of Dad's money *now*. And how does this younger son honor his father's money? **"Not many days later, the younger son gathered all he had and took a journey into a far country, and there he squandered his property in reckless living,"**  and this reckless living, we learn later in the parable, involves prostitutes—just the kind of stuff to feed the gossip mill. Lord have mercy!

At this point it is clear to us all that the younger son should *repent*—he needs to repent of his reckless living—he has a tremendous opportunity to leave Vegas now. But while he is out there wasting *his father's* money,
> **When he had spent everything, a severe famine arose in that country, and he began to be in need. So he went and hired himself out to one of the citizens of that country, who sent him into his fields** ***to feed pigs*. And he was longing to be fed with the pods that the pigs ate, and no one gave him anything.**

I've never fed pigs and I've never been that hungry, but the younger son's stomach is growling. Look at the situation he's gotten himself into because of his own sin. You might expect the prodigal son to try to blame this on someone else, but something different happens.
> **When he came to himself, he said, "How many of my father's hired servants have more than enough bread, but I perish here with hunger! I will arise and go to my father, and I will say to him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Treat me as one of your hired servants.' "**

This is the account we have of the prodigal son's repentance.
> **Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son. Treat me as one of your hired servants.**

Not "have me back as your son"—**"treat me as one of your hired servants."**  He acknowledges that he has sinned against his father and against heaven. But if he's going to eat, he knows that his father's servants eat better than he does. And take note what a *blessing* it is for there to be a famine in the land: the famine has created the opportunity for the prodigal son to repent. Belovèd in the Lord, this text teaches us true repentance.

We can also learn true repentance from King David—**"I have sinned against the LORD"**  —is all he said when he confessed his sins of murder, adultery, and coveting. We can also learn true repentance from the thief on the cross—**"Jesus, remember me when You come into your kingdom."**  God read their hearts and found their repentance sincere and acceptable.

Belovèd in the Lord, Jesus *has* remembered *us* when prays on the Cross, and let's say it together: **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do"**  (Luke 23:34a) is our Lord's prayer on our behalf. Belovèd in the Lord, here is the million-dollar question: has our heavenly Father forgiven us? Yes! Our Father in heaven forgives us all in the name of His Son Jesus who loved us and died for us, bearing our sins on the Cross! This is most certainly true, and how!
> **\[The younger son] arose and came to his father. But while he was still a long way off, his father saw him and felt compassion,**  ***and ran and embraced him and kissed him*. And the son said to him, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son."**  ***But*** **the father said to his servants, "Bring quickly the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet. And bring the fattened calf and kill it, and let us eat** ***and celebrate*. For this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found."**

Behold the JOY BEFORE THE FATHER just to have His son back. Note that He cares less about the lost money. Instead, He wants to *spend more money* to throw a party for His son who was lost, and is found. (This is where we sing *Amazing Grace*.) Belovèd in the Lord, behold our heavenly Father's feelings toward us when we turn from our sin and return to Him in the name of His only-begotten Son Jesus. He hugs us and kisses us—that's how He feels just to have us back. The angels may be celebrating, but this is *the Father's party*.

Sadly, the older son feels out of place at this party. He is most welcome at the party, but the problem is with … his grudge against his Father.
> **Look, these many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed your command, yet you never gave me a young goat, that I might celebrate with my friends. But when this son of yours came, who has devoured your property with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him!**

Let us then be reminded, belovèd in the Lord, that the JOY BEFORE THE FATHER extends to every repentant sinner who comes to Jesus, even if we don't share that joy. But bless us, Holy Spirit, that we do.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Isaiah 12:1
\[1] You will say in that day:
“I will give thanks to you, O LORD,
for though you were angry with me,
your anger turned away,
that you might comfort me. (ESV)

2 Corinthians 5:17
\[17] Therefore, if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old has passed away; behold, the new has come. (ESV)

2 Corinthians 5:21
\[21] For our sake he made him to be sin who knew no sin, so that in him we might become the righteousness of God. (ESV)

Luke 14:26–28
\[26] “If anyone comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple. \[27] Whoever does not bear his own cross and come after me cannot be my disciple. \[28] For which of you, desiring to build a tower, does not first sit down and count the cost, whether he has enough to complete it? (ESV)

Luke 14:33
\[33] So therefore, any one of you who does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple. (ESV)

Luke 15:7
\[7] Just so, I tell you, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance. (ESV)

From last week's sermon:

One question that may bother us is "Have I repented well enough?" Turn to Luke, chapter 23 and behold the thief who turns to our crucified Lord and says simply, **"Jesus, remember me when You come into your kingdom"**  (Luke 23:42). Turn to 2 Samuel, chapter 12 and hear how the poor, miserable sinner King David repents: **"I have sinned against the LORD"**  is his simple confession to Nathan, no more, no less. **And Nathan \[says] to David, "The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die"**  (2 Sam. 12:13). And our Lord says to the thief, **"Truly, I say to you, today you will be with Me in Paradise"**  (Luke 23:43).

From today's Holy Gospel:

Luke 15:21
\[21] And the son said to him, ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and before you. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.’ (ESV)