---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 15, 2026
title: YOU ARE MY PORTION IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING
occasion: 4th Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Is. 42:14-21
  - Ps. 142
  - Eph. 5:8-14
  - John 9
sermon_text: Ps. 142
bible_version: ESV
---

# YOU ARE MY PORTION IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We pray, gracious Father, for Your Holy Spirit to teach us to pray and be victorious in the name of Your Son, Jesus, when we bear our cross and follow Him. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, last week's psalm was Psalm 95, and we zeroed in on this passage: **"TODAY, IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS, as at Meribah, as on the day at Massah in the wilderness, when your fathers put Me to the test and put Me to the proof, though they had seen My work."**  The Israelites had passed through the Red Sea by God's mighty hand, they had camped at Rephidim, and there they hardened their hearts against the Lord and they **quarreled with Moses and said, "Give us water to drink"**  (Ex. 17:2a).

Turning now to today's psalm, the tone is set in the first two verses:
> **With my voice I cry out to the LORD; with my voice I plead for mercy to the LORD.** ***I pour out my complaint before Him*; I tell my trouble before Him.**

Are we to take this complaining to be like the Israelites quarreling at Meribah? Though they may sound similar, the complaining in today's psalm is entirely different, as we shall see.

We are told at the top of today's psalm that David wrote it and we are told what was going on when he wrote it: we are told that David wrote it **"when he was in a cave."**  Let us then review precisely what was going on when David was in a cave. David was being pursued by King Saul. *\[Ask]*  Does everyone remember why Saul was chasing after David? … King Saul wanted David dead because Saul was jealous of him. Saul was king of Israel; David was not king yet. The Bible tells us that David hid in a cave twice while Saul was after him. The first time is recorded in 1 Samuel, chapter 22. After David had acted like a madman before Achish the King of Gath (1 Sam. 21),
> **David departed from there and escaped to the cave of Adullam. And when his brothers and all his father's house heard it, they went down there to him. And everyone who was in distress, and everyone who was in debt, and everyone who was bitter in soul, gathered to \[David]. And he became commander over them. And there were with him about four hundred men.**  (1 Sam. 22:1–2)

That was the first time David was in a cave. The second time is recorded in 1 Samuel, chapter 24, after David's men had been on one side of a mountain and Saul's men had been on the other side, pursuing them (2 Sam. 23:25–28).
> **Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel and went to seek David and his men in front of the Wildgoats' Rocks. And \[Saul] came to the sheepfolds by the way, where there was a cave, and \[he] went in to relieve himself. Now David and his men were sitting in the innermost parts of the cave. And the men of David said to him, "Here is the day of which the LORD said to you, 'Behold, I will give your enemy into your hand, and you shall do to him as it shall seem good to you.' "**

Take note that this was David's golden opportunity to take revenge on His enemy Saul.
> **Then David arose and stealthily cut off a corner of Saul's robe. And afterward David's heart struck him, because he had cut off a corner of Saul's robe. He said to his men, "The LORD forbid that I should do this thing to my lord, the LORD's anointed, to put out my hand against him, seeing he is the LORD's anointed." So David persuaded his men with these words and did** ***not*** **permit them to attack Saul. And Saul rose up and left the cave and went on his way.**  (1 Sam. 24:2–7)

In both cases of David's caves we are told the disposition of his heart. The Lord is able to read the disposition of our hearts at all times: **"I the LORD search the heart and test the mind, to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his deeds"**  (Jer. 17:10). In these two cases of David in a cave, we are told what the Lord plainly sees: David's heart is merciful toward his enemy Saul and he has compassion for those in need. So, unless there was another time that David was in a cave we can be sure of the disposition of his heart when he wrote today's psalm: the disposition of his heart is not the hardening of his heart but the demonstration of the heart of flesh that is careful to walk in God's ways (Ezek. 36:26–27). David's heart is altogether *different from* the Israelites' who **quarreled with Moses and said, "Give us water to drink."** We have before us, therefore, a prayer of *godly complaining* to the Lord — there is such a thing as godly complaining — a sacred prayer of telling our troubles to Him. David's trouble is his enemy Saul, who wants him dead.

*\[Transition]*  We also have before us today the healing of the man born blind in the Holy Gospel — a monumental miracle because never in the history of the world had anyone given sight to a man born blind (John 9:32), and Jesus did it. He said,
> **"We must work the works of Him who sent Me while it is day; night is coming, when no one can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world." Having said these things, He spit on the ground and made mud with the saliva. Then He anointed the man's eyes with the mud and said to him, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam" (which means Sent). So he went and washed and came back seeing.**  (John 9:4–7)

Alleluia! And right before this healing we are told something of great benefit if we ever find ourselves telling our troubles to the Lord — we are told something that might surprise you if you have never heard it before. This man in John, chapter 9 had been born blind. And
> **\[Jesus'] disciples asked Him, "Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?" \[He] answered, "It was not that this man sinned, or his parents,** ***but that the works of God might be displayed in him*."**  (John 9:2–3)

It is entirely possible that you are suffering not for any particular sin but that the works of God might be displayed in you. Another type of suffering is God disciplining us for a sin we have committed (Ps. 94:12; 119:67; Heb. 12:6), and God grant us the wisdom to know the difference. But there is a difference, and in the case of the man born blind, as it was in the case of Job, God has allowed Satan to afflict him that the work of Jesus might be displayed in him.

We, belovèd in the Lord, are clearly taught in the Bible that this is also God's good and gracious will for every one of us. For our Lord clearly tells us,
> **If anyone would come after Me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow Me. For whoever would save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for My sake will find it.**  (Matt. 16:24–25)

Belovèd in the Lord, do you want to live? "Here," Jesus says, "Take up your cross and follow Me." Godly suffering is *living*. Godly suffering after we have repented and been absolved in Jesus' name yet *still* the trouble comes is the only way to find life, as our Lord Jesus tells us to deny ourselves and take up our crosses and follow Him. We're always looking for life. We are to look for it not in money — we are to find life not in some other idol. Belovèd in the Lord, the only place where life is found is in Jesus, the Son of God, who took on our flesh to *\[Crucifixion]*  bear our sins and be raised for our justification (Rom. 4:25). Our Lord promises to show us life — real living here on earth, not Satan's fake living. And after our life here on earth? The resurrection of our dead bodies and eternal life! Alleluia! (More on that next week in the Old Testament lesson.)

And this is exactly how we pray today's psalm, for " **YOU ARE MY PORTION IN THE LAND OF THE LIVING**. You have promised it Lord, and this is most certainly true. Help me to endure my enemy who pursues me, and grant me Your Holy Spirit to show mercy even as David showed mercy to Saul. Ever hold up before me Your Cross, where you suffered mockery and death, winning my forgiveness and salvation." **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Psalm 146:7–8
\[7] who executes justice for the oppressed,
who gives food to the hungry.


The LORD sets the prisoners free;
\[8] the LORD opens the eyes of the blind.
The LORD lifts up those who are bowed down;
the LORD loves the righteous. (ESV)

John 9:1
\[1] As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth. (ESV)

"Was blind but now I see."

John 9:39
\[39] Jesus said, “For judgment I came into this world, that those who do not see may see, and those who see may become blind.” (ESV)

"As long as I know how to love I know I'll stay alive." Gloria Gaynor

The Psalms, I was taught in seminary, are a little Bible — everything in the Bible you can find in the Psalms — if you know the Psalms well the whole Bible is already familiar to you.