---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 24, 2024
title: JOSEPH, SON OF DAVID, DO NOT FEAR TO TAKE MARY AS YOUR WIFE.
occasion: Christmas Eve
readings:
  - Gen. 3:14-15
  - Micah 5:2
  - Is. 9:2-7
  - Matt. 1:18-25
  - Luke 2:1-7
  - Luke 2:8-14
  - Luke 2:15-20
sermon_text: Matt. 1:18-25
bible_version: ESV
---

# JOSEPH, SON OF DAVID, DO NOT FEAR TO TAKE MARY AS YOUR WIFE.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Come Lord Jesus, we are so glad you have you in our hearts. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Joseph and Mary, as you well know, are engaged. This is a giant step in the life of a young woman and a young man, that we should be joined as one flesh in the sight of God (Gen. 2:24). *\[Illustration]*  I can never forget the time that Trina and I were engaged. More than half of our grandparents were still alive, and my dear mother-in-law threw a giant engagement party at her house. The grandparents were there with grand smiles—our parents were there and even the archbishop! The party was great and there were Trina and me—engaged to be married and with huge expectations. Our wedding day was ahead of us.

We hear from the Gospels that Joseph and Mary are also engaged, but there is no mention of a giant engagement party. Mary's parents are not mentioned in the Bible, but what is mentioned is that Joseph is already caring for Mary, leading many to believe that Mary's parents were both asleep in the Lord, not to even mention her grandparents. But Mary's husband-to-be, Joseph, the Bible tells us, is a righteous man. And Joseph does what needs to be done so that the engagement and the wedding are all in order and that Mary is cared for.

Now something has happened so that Mary is already expecting a child and Joseph's hopes and dreams, after all of his effort, are in jeopardy. Now he has to figure out what to do about Mary, his betrothed, and he has decided to divorce her quietly. Worry—from the Scriptures we can clearly see that Joseph is worried, stressed out—what is going to happen now? Let us pay particular attention, belovèd in the Lord, let us pay *particular* attention that the Lord Himself orchestrated this whole situation, and let us see what comes out of this situation *for us*. God the Father Himself chose how His only-begotten Son would be born of a woman to be our Savior, and in what situation. God Himself chose this worry for Joseph.

It may be better to say that Joseph was the one who chose to worry because he had not paid enough attention to the prophet Isaiah, who had declared, **"Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and they shall call his name Immanuel (which means, God with us)"**  (Is. 7:14; Matt. 1:23).

And as for Mary, all we can do is praise her—there is absolutely *nothing* to fear about her—for she is risking her hopes and dreams for marriage on the Word of the angel Gabriel: **"Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to your Word"**  (Luke 1:38b). We cannot help but praise Mary not because she has saved us in any way, but because she has done much better than Eve did in the Garden of Eden. Back there in the Garden of Eden Eve tossed God's Word to the side and chose to dance to the devil's tune. But not Mary: Mary paid laser-attention to God's Word, weighed it again her future happiness as a bride, and went with the Word of God. Because of her faith we praise Mary and, of course, we are amazed by the holy Child to Whom she give birth. He is conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the virgin Mary to suffer under Pontius Pilate, to be crucified, die, and be buried bearing our sin. By faith Mary gives birth to God Incarnate—true God and true man—who has come to save us from our sins and from the power of the devil. Alleluia! Mary's Son is her, and our, Savior, Whom our heavenly Father has given us out of pity for us sinners. *\[Sing]*

> *This is the Christ, our God Most High,*
> *Who hears your sad and bitter cry;*
> *He will Himself your Savior be*
> *From all your sins to set you free.*


Joseph's tender matter of the heart has also become our tender matter of the heart. What are we anxious about? How do we regard the Christ Child? What misfortune has God allowed to come to us? Perhaps sickness or despair? On top of it all there is more than enough trouble in the world, and where are we to get any help? Belovèd in the Lord, our help is not so much to get ourselves, but to *be received* as we receive with thankful hearts the Christ Child given to us. *\[Christmas]*  Our help sleeps in a manger. Our help nurses at His mother's breast. *He will Himself your Savior be from all your sins to set you free.*

He helps us when He fights the devil for us. He helps us when He bears our sins. He helps us at all times as He reigns in our hearts through His Word and His Spirit.
> **Joseph, son of David, do not fear to take Mary as your wife, for that which is conceived in her is from the Holy Spirit. She will bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus, for he will save his people from their sins.**

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes