---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 24, 2025
title: ALMOST ALL ABOUT HER IS ORDINARY
occasion: Christmas Eve
readings:
  - Is. 9:2-7
  - Titus 2:11-14
  - Luke 2:1-20
sermon_text: Luke 2:7
bible_version: ESV
---

# ALMOST ALL ABOUT HER IS ORDINARY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, you sent us Your Son, born of Mary, born as one of us, to save us. Thank you! In Jesus' name, Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, how do we know the Bible is true? Many claim that the Bible is just a human document like any other. But these days things are different. When I say *a human document like any other*, I can't say *any other* anymore, because the *non-human* documents are multiplying, which at some point -- maybe they already have -- at some point the AI documents will outnumber the human documents. Belovèd in the Lord, hold on to your Bibles! God has gone to a lot of trouble to tell us what we need to know. And so, we consider the Bible differently from all other books -- God speaks and we listen. Today we hear about the birth of His Son.

But do we believe? An avid fisherman was heard to mention the reason he knows the Bible is true. According to the fisherman the Bible has got to be true because it says in John, chapter 21, **"that night they caught nothing"**  (John 21:3b). A made-up book would make up fishing stories. "I had a big lunker, but it broke my ten-pound test line." The fisherman concluded that if he can believe the fishing story he can believe the rest of the Bible.

But hear what our Lord Jesus Himself says about the Bible:
> **Do not think that I have come to abolish the Law or the Prophets; I have not come to abolish them** ***but to fulfill them*. For truly, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away, not an iota, not a dot, will pass from the Law until all is accomplished.**  (Matt. 5:17–18)

Tonight we celebrate that the fulfillment of Isaiah, chapter 9, our third reading read by Chris, has happened. **"For to us a Child is born, to us a Son is given"**  (Is. 9:6a). And hear what St. Paul says: **"We impart this in words not taught by human wisdom but** ***taught by the Spirit*, interpreting spiritual truths to those who are spiritual"**  (1 Cor. 2:13). And again Paul writes to Timothy,
> **Continue in what you have learned and have firmly believed, knowing from whom you learned it and how from childhood you have been acquainted with the \[Scriptures],**  ***which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus*. All Scripture is breathed out by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness.**  (2 Tim. 3:14–16)

Tonight we celebrate the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ as it is recorded for us in the Bible. And we take particular notice of what Scripture tells us of His mother - His Father is God but his mother is human -- Mary, betrothed to be married to Joseph. She is engaged to be married to Joseph *just like any other young Jewish woman* would be engaged to be married. One detail stands out, however: Mary lives with Joseph and not with her parents. If her parents were still living, she presumably would live at home with them during her betrothal. It appears that Mary is an orphan, which is not that out of the ordinary. In fact, ALMOST ALL ABOUT MARY IS ORDINARY.

We are given a definite time and a definite place where Mary gives birth.
> **In those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be registered. This was the first registration when Quirinius was governor of Syria. And all went to be registered, each to his own town.**  (Luke 2:1–3)

This is not too different from saying, "In the first year of the Trump administration, on April 15, I paid my taxes." Ordinary - I did what every other taxpayer did who didn't file for an extension. Joseph cannot register online - he has to travel with Mary, who is with Child, back to his hometown to register like everyone else.

And Mary is with Child -- concerning Mary's pregnancy we are only told that she is **"with Child, and ... the time came for her to give birth"**  (Luke 2:5–6). No complications reported -- thanks be to God! -- so it does appear that Mary has had a normal pregnancy. I am aware that at this point it is wiser for me to zip my lip because I have never carried a child or given birth to a child. From what I've seen and what I've been told, being in the third trimester and then giving birth to a child is not ordinary - maybe *outstanding* - but the Bible does report that Mary gives birth just like countless other women do.

**"She gave birth to her firstborn Son and wrapped Him in swaddling cloths and laid Him in a manger, because there was no place for them in the inn."**  Thank God for every healthy pregnancy and childbirth! Christ was born in the ordinary way -- we are not told about Mary's contractions, but she had them -- but here we have a privation mentioned that everyone knows about: there is no room for Mary, Joseph, and baby Jesus in the inn. But then again, humble circumstances are ordinary for many, even the majority of people. So Mary gives birth in a stall where animals live, and lays her Son in a manger. You know I'm proud of my French and I want you to know that *\[French pronunciation]*  *manger* means *to eat*. In English we say *manger*, but in case this detail was not clear to you, the animals in the stall eat out of that manger. Nevertheless, this ordinary manger makes for a perfect crib for the Christ Child. *"The little Lord Jesus asleep on the hay."*

*\[Transition]*  What's *not* ordinary about Mary -- what's *not* ordinary about the manger - what's *not* ordinary about anything -- is Mary's Son. Her Son created those animals in the stall, and now they're looking at Him lying in their manger -- what a momentous occasion for all Creation! But we are not told how these animals respond to their Creator lying there, an infant, right before their eyes. But I bet the cow swished its tail and chewed its cud, just as God created it. I bet the sheep said, "Baaa." And what a moment it is for the sake of the Christ Child.

Not being told we really can't add anything. And now a word of caution: we do well to be careful not to make more of Mary than we are told in the Bible. She is a young Jewish woman. We venerate her for her faith -- by faith she conceived our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in her womb. But some call her Queen of Heaven -- nowhere in the Bible is she called Queen of Heaven. In 1950 the pope -- official Roman Catholic doctrine -- declared the assumption of Mary to be true -- that she went straight up to heaven alive like Elijah. Again, nowhere does the Bible teach the assumption of Mary. Then there's the immaculate conception. The Roman Catholic doctrine of the immaculate conception is that *Mary* -- not only Jesus, but Mary also -- was conceived and born without sin. Again, not being told in the Bible we can't add anything. Mary was conceived in the ordinary way, with sin, and she needs a Savior, too. And tonight she gives birth to Him.

Belovèd in the Lord, if you were not aware of God's promise of a Savior in the Garden of Eden, you should be. Because when Eve gave birth to Cain, she said, **"I have gotten a man the LORD"**  (Gen. 4:1). Eve thought she had given birth to the Savior, but she had not -- she had to wait for Mary to give birth to the Savior. Tonight, the virgin Mary gives birth to Immanuel, God with Us, as Isaiah foretold (Is. 7:14) but which Eve also believed.
Going back to what Eve said when she gave birth to Cain, our translations typically add words to help make the sentence smoother, like **"I have gotten a man** ***with the help*** **of the LORD."**  But for the record, *with the help of* is not in the Hebrew. **"I have gotten a man the LORD,"**  Eve said. For God had promised that Eve's Seed would bruise Satan's head (Gen. 3:15). Eve wanted her Seed to be born, the sooner the better, to deliver her and Adam from the misery of sin that they had fallen into. So she exclaimed at the birth of Cain, **"I have gotten a man the LORD."**  It does appear that even in Genesis Eve understood that our Savior would have to be the God-Man - Son of Man, Son of God.

He is the One now, finally born after thousands of years of waiting -- God born as a man, God born as our brother to defeat death and the devil -- the sinless Child lying in the manger. Joseph and Mary adore Him. Mary had even earlier exclaimed to Elizabeth, **"My spirit rejoices in God, my Savior."**  Now she holds Him. She, by the true immaculate conception by the Holy Spirit, has given birth to her Savior, her sinless Son, Jesus. I invite you to sing along. *\[Sing]*
> *Highest, most holy,*
> *Light of Light eternal,*
> *Born of a virgin, a mortal He comes;*
> *Son of the Father*
> *Now in flesh appearing!*
> *O come, let us adore Him,*
> *O come, let us adore Him,*
> *O come, let us adore Him,*
> *Christ the Lord!*
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
This sermon is taken from *Concordia Pulpit Resources*, Vol. 36, Part 1, Series A, pp. 50–51.

The virgin Mary gives birth to her Son — that's not normal.