---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: June 22, 2025
title: SITTING AT THE FEET OF JESUS, CLOTHED AND IN HIS RIGHT MIND
occasion: 2nd Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Is. 65:1-9
  - Gal. 3:23-4:7
  - Luke 8:26-39
sermon_text: Luke 8:26-39
bible_version: ESV
---

# SITTING AT THE FEET OF JESUS, CLOTHED AND IN HIS RIGHT MIND

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Lord, with Your Spirit, that only true faith in Jesus be in our hearts. In Jesus' name, we pray, keep the demons away. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today's Holy Gospel is perhaps *the* most famous account of our Lord Jesus Christ casting out demons—this account is found not only in Luke, but also in Matthew and Mark. Our Lord casts the legion of demons out of a man and into a herd of pigs; the herd then runs down the steep bank and drowns itself in the Sea of Galilee.

Imagine we were in a fishing boat that day, fishing off the southeast coast of the Sea of Galilee, in the land of the Gerasenes. We hear a massive roar different from anything we've heard before: *two thousand* squeals (Mark 5:13) coming down the embankment—two thousand pigs throwing themselves into the sea and drowning—two thousand dead pigs floating in the water. What is going on here? I have never seen anything like this in my life.

What is going on is that there are two men (Matt. 8:28)—Luke's account mentions only one of them—still, two men possessed by a whole *legion* of demons. That's the bad news. The good news is that Jesus Christ has commanded the demons to leave these men and they do. The demons enter the herd of pigs, and the herd drowns itself in the sea. The good news, recorded by Luke, is that the man who is now no longer demon-possessed is SITTING AT THE FEET OF JESUS, CLOTHED AND IN HIS RIGHT MIND, thanks be to God!

How did these men ever get possessed by demons? We are not told it happened, but we are told about Judas Iscariot—a lesson to remember from Holy Week. **"\[Judas] used to help himself to what was put into \[the moneybag]"**  (John 12:6). Judas was a thief. He broke the Seventh Commandment.
> **You shall not steal.**  *What does this mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not take our neighbor's money or possessions, or get them in any dishonest way, but help him to improve and protect his possessions and income.

**"Then Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve"**  (Luke 22:3), which I find to be perhaps the most terrifying verse of the Bible—to have Satan himself enter Judas on Maundy Thursday and take control and drag Judas to hell (Acts 1:25), God forbid! The stark warning from Scripture is to stay away from sin—even a little one. Satan would have us have no idea how dangerous our sin is. Pray for the Spirit that we not succumb to temptation and fall prey to sin that grows to have dominion over us so that Satan enters us or a demon comes in. If it happened to one of the twelve apostles, it can happen to any of us. And I believe that Judas, with Satan himself entering into him and seizing control, was worse off than the man in Gadara, who is possessed by a whole legion of demons.
> **When Jesus had stepped out on land, there met him a man from the city who had demons. For a long time he had worn no clothes, and he had not lived in a house but among the tombs.**

This man at Gadara, we would all recognize, is out of control.
> **For many a time \[the demon] had seized \[that man]. He was kept under guard and bound with chains and shackles, but he would break the bonds and be driven by the demon into the desert. Jesus then asked him, "What is your name?" And he said, "Legion," for many demons had entered him.**

I get asked from time to time, "Pastor, did you ever deal with someone who was demon possessed?" Frankly, I have been challenged to discern the difference between demon possession and mental illness, but I do not doubt the testimony of Scripture, that demons are real and that sin is the avenue for them to enter into us. I have, on one occasion, watched a man, who I believe used drugs, turn a screw into his forearm. And I thought, "Only Satan can get anyone to do that."

We also have a stark warning from our Lord Jesus to us, who have believed in Him and received the Holy Spirit, and are tempted daily.
> **When the unclean spirit has gone out of a person, it passes through waterless places seeking rest, but finds none. Then it says, "I will return to my house from which I came." And when it comes, it finds the house empty, swept, and put in order. Then it goes and brings with it seven other spirits more evil than itself, and they enter and dwell there, and the last state of that person is worse than the first. So also will it be with this evil generation.**  (Matt. 12:43–45)

The avenue for being possessed by multiple demons is to let them back in after Christ has cast them out.

Belovèd in the Lord, we are truly in constant need of the Holy Spirit to keep us safe from sin and demons. We are taught by our Lord to especially pray for the Holy Spirit (Luke 11:13) and we are reminded that we are promised the Holy Spirit *\[font]*  with our Baptism (Acts 2:38). Have you ever noticed that the rite of Baptism begins with a mini-exorcism?
* Do you renounce the devil?
* Yes, I renounce him.
* Do you renounce all his works?
* Yes, I renounce them.
* Do you renounce all his ways?
* Yes, I renounce them.

This is followed by the confession of the Apostles's Creed and then Baptism in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (Matt. 28:19) according to Christ's command and promise, as St. Paul declares in our Epistle lesson:
> **For in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God, through faith. For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.**  (Gal. 3:26–27)

As baptized Christians we now wear Christ and he lives in our hearts by faith alone through the indwelling of the Holy Spirit.

Belovèd in the Lord, outside of this faith we are not safe from demons, for Scripture declares, **"The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil"**  (1 John 3:8b). Outside of faith in Jesus the devil manifests his work in us. *\[Crucifixion]*  But Jesus destroyed the works of the devil by bearing our sins on the Cross so that they are truly forgotten by God for all who believe that Jesus did this for us.
> **He was pierced for our transgressions; He was crushed for our sins; the punishment that brought us peace was upon Him. And by His wounds, by His wounds, we are healed.**  (Is. 53:5; from the song)

Believe it, and the devil can no longer accuse us: we wear Jesus and Jesus has stopped him. Believe it, and the demons cannot enter in. Believe it, and we too are SITTING AT THE FEET OF JESUS, CLOTHED AND IN OUR RIGHT MIND.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes