---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: MMM DD, YYYY
title: DAVID CALLS HIM "LORD." HOW IS HE HIS SON?
occasion: 24th Sunday after Pentecost (All Saints observed)
readings:
  - Deut. 6:1-9
  - Heb. 9:11-22
  - Mark 12:28-37
sermon_text: Mark 12:28-37
bible_version: ESV
---

# DAVID CALLS HIM "LORD." HOW IS HE HIS SON?

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Spirit, to see clearly daily that Jesus is the Christ, our Savior from sin. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, *\[sing]*
> *For all the saints who from their labors rest,* 
> *Who Thee by faith before the world confessed*

Today's the day to sing it, and so is every other day for that matter. We sing about all the saints who have confessed that Jesus Christ is Lord. All the saints, *both Old Testament and New*, confess Jesus to be Lord and God and Christ.

We have, of course, St. Peter's confession of faith in the New Testament: **"You are the Christ, the Son of the living God"**  (Matt. 16:16). But in the Old Testament we have Job's confession of faith, which was heard at both Sandy's and Winnie's gravesides this week. Again, this is Job speaking in *the Old Testament*.
> **Oh, that my words were written! Oh, that they were inscribed in a book! That they were engraved on a rock with an iron pen and lead, forever! For I know that my Redeemer lives, And He shall stand at last on the earth. And after my skin is destroyed, this I know, that in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for myself, and my eyes shall behold, and not another. How my heart yearns within me!**  (Job 19:23–27)

How I believe this with all my heart that because Jesus lives, I, too, will live forever in my own flesh. Yes, this is the confession of Job that Jesus Christ is Lord, and it is found *in the Old Testament*; we sing it every Easter (LSB 461).

In today's Holy Gospel we are directed to *another* Old Testament confession of faith in Jesus. (Call this All Saints, call this pre-Advent.) We have another Old Testament confession of faith in Jesus which is found in the first verse of Psalm 110, where *King David*, inspired by the Spirit, prophesies, **"The LORD said to my Lord, 'Sit at My right hand, until I put Your enemies under Your feet.'"**  Our Lord Jesus, in the Holy Gospel, brings up the prophecy of Psalm 110 while He's teaching in the temple in Jerusalem—while He's teaching in the place where the One True God of Israel is found and His Word is taught and He is worshiped. Our Holy Gospel tells us that our Lord Jesus is teaching in the temple and we have a parallel passage in Matthew, chapter 22 that tells us that the Pharisees are there listening to Jesus.
> **While the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question, saying, "What do you think about** ***the Christ*? Whose son is He?" They said to him, "** ***The Son of David*."**  (Matt. 22:41–42)

Belovèd in the Lord, here we have the wonderful word *Christ*, a very, very wonderful word—*Christ*. Here we have not just the word *Christ*, but ***the*** *Christ*. ***The*** *Christ* is in Greek. *\[Ask]*  Can someone please tell how to say *the Christ* in Hebrew? … ***The*** *Messiah*. ***The*** *Messiah* in Hebrew is ***the*** *Christ* in Greek, and ***the*** *Christ* means ***the*** *Anointed One*—anointed by God to carry out His good and gracious will to save us from our sin. The Christ, quite simply, is the Savior that God has promised all along that He will come to save the Jewish nation out of all her trouble. All the Jews are waiting for the Christ—all the Jews are waiting for Him because God has promised He will come, and the Pharisees, from having properly understood the Scriptures, know that the Christ is the Son of David. For we hear the LORD promise this to King David in 2 Samuel, chapter 7. The LORD says to David,
> **When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up** ***your Seed*** **after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish His kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of His kingdom forever.**  (2 Sam. 7:12–13)

This promised Seed of David, the Son of David—this promised Son of David, the Pharisees know—this Seed of David is *the* Christ; this is the correct answer that the Pharisees give when our Lord Jesus asks them, **"What do you think about** ***the Christ*? Whose Son is He?"**

**"The Son of David,"**  answer the Pharisees, who, as you know, are well-trained in the Scriptures—very well trained. And, again, this Son of David is the promised *Seed* of David whose kingdom will have no end.

Belovèd in the Lord, I invite you to hear again all that is promised in the Old Testament about the Messiah. It isn't even Advent yet, but guess what? Advent is around the corner and we will dedicate this Advent season to hearing again all that is promised in the Old Testament about *the* Christ. For today, I want to impress on you but one little detail about *the* promised Messiah: *Seed*. The *Son* of David is literally the *Seed* of David whom God promises in 2 Samuel, chapter 7.

Now, belovèd in the Lord, where have we heard *Seed* before and gotten our hopes up? We've heard it even before David—we've heard it in the Garden of Eden—we've heard of the Seed of Eve.

This week Nikki, Tommy, Julie, and I had instruction class at McDonald's. And there at Denison and W. 25th we heard God promise *this*: **"I will put enmity between you**\[, Satan,] **and the woman, and between your seed and her seed; He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise His heel"**  (Gen. 3:15). Adam and Eve heard this promise as God addressed Satan: " *The* Seed of Eve is coming, and *the* Seed of Eve will bruise your head, Satan."

Belovèd in the Lord, the Seed of Eve was already promised in the Garden of Eden for us, who are born with that awful sin inherited from Adam. How can we not rejoice that God long ago promised us our Savior from sin, and that God kept His promise and *\[Cross]*  He sent us our Savior Jesus to be the propitiation for our sin? Have I not sinned enough already? Is it time to stop sinning? But I *can't* stop as long as I'm this poor, stinking bag of worms, as Luther said—as long as I'm still in this sinful and mortal flesh that can do no nothing but sin and die. I'm helpless!—‡n my own I'm helpless against sin. St. Paul himself writes,
> **Wretched man that I am! Who will deliver me from this body of death?**  (Rom. 7:24)

The Seed of Eve *can*. All of God's anger at my sin He, the Seed of Eve, puts away. My death for my sin He, the Seed of Eve, also puts away. My daily inclination to sin while I live in the flesh He, the Seed of Eve, also puts away because He comes to live in my heart. The Seed of Eve is the Savior to crush Satan under His heel and win for us our forgiveness by *\[Cross]*  shedding His holy, precious blood for us.

And where else have we heard *Seed* before and gotten our hopes up? The Seed of Abraham.
> **\[The LORD] brought \[Abraham] outside and said, "Look toward heaven, and number the stars, if you are able to number them." Then he said to \[Abraham], "So shall your** ***Seed*** **be."**  (Gen. 15:5)

This promised Seed will not be just one, but many—*all the saints*, both Old Testament and New.

*\[Conclusion]*  And where have we heard *Seed* before and gotten our hopes up? The Seed of David is the Son of David, *the* Christ. DAVID CALLS HIM "LORD." HOW IS HE HIS SON? He is his son because He is his promised Seed to come from David's body, born of Mary, and whose throne is established forever. He is David's Lord because He is David's, and our, Savior from sin.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
John 20:28
\[28] Thomas answered him, “My Lord and my God!” (ESV)
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |