---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: May 25, 2025
title: FOR THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVES YOU
occasion: 6th Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 16:9-15
  - Rev. 21:9-14, 21-27
  - John 16:23-33
sermon_text: John 16:23-33
bible_version: ESV
---

# FOR THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVES YOU

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We love You too, heavenly Father, in the name of Your only-begotten Son, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, *\[sing]*
> *Jesus loves me! This I know,* 
> *For the Bible tells me so.* 
> *Little ones to Him belong;* 
> *They are weak, but He is strong.* 
> *Yes, Jesus loves me!* 
> *Yes, Jesus loves me!* 
> *Yes, Jesus loves me!* 
> *The Bible tells me so.*

Let us learn this song well and teach it to our children, **for while we were still sinners, Christ died for us** (Rom. 5:8b). Scripture does clearly teach that we are Christ's sheep, His little ones, and He is our Good Shepherd who has laid down His life for us to protect us from the wolf (John 10). Jesus does love us dearly.

*\[Transition]*  But if that were the only hymn we sang, that would not be the whole counsel of God (Acts 20:27). Let us ever be reminded by *\[Gethsemane]*  our window not only how much Jesus loves us, but also how much Jesus He loves His Father. For at Gethsemane our Lord prayed, **"Father, if You are willing, remove this cup from Me. Nevertheless, not My will, but Yours, be done"**  (Luke 22:42). He prayed this, demonstrating His obedient love to His Father.

Please take note that God the Father has no sins to confess—He is holy—*we* are the sinners with unclean lips (Is. 6:5)—definitely not our heavenly Father! If Christ loved us and died for us while we were sinners, His love for His Father has got to be something different. I invite you to consider that Christ's love for His Father is a different kind of love than His love for us. *Love*, sadly, is an abused word. You may have seen the slogan *Love is love* to defend definitions of love that God never created. Let us, then, turn away from slogans and turn to Scripture, where true love is revealed.

These two loves, as I said—Christ's love for us and His love for His Father—are different. Christ's loves His Father and listens to Him. He also loves us even when we *don't* listen to Him. (There's a difference.) Now we will listen as the Lord of Love teaches us.
> **In that day you will ask nothing of Me. Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in My name, He will give it to you. Until now you have asked nothing in My name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be full.**

We pick up from where we left off last week: **"NO ONE WILL TAKE YOUR JOY FROM YOU."**  Since *Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!* , no one, not even the devil, can rob us of our joy that Christ is alive and victorious and lives in our hearts so that **we too** **might walk in newness of life** (Rom. 6:4). What a joy it is to live our new lives in Christ! Our Lord continues with a ***Truly, truly***. ***Truly, truly*** means now is the best time to listen. *\[Ask]*  Do you know what ***Truly, truly*** is in Greek—in the original? It's ***Amen, amen***. *Amen* is a word we know very well—it's word which we say in English all the time. *Amen* is the straight Greek word for *truly*. Whenever Jesus says, ***Amen, amen***, it's time for us to listen. " **Truly, truly, I say to you, whatever you ask of the Father in My name, He will give it to you."**

Belovèd in the Lord, now that we rejoice in our Lord, who was slain for our sins and lives again, *pray*—our risen Lord directs us to ask His Father for anything in His name and it's done. Does He not also direct us to pray, **"** ***Our*** **Father"**  (Matt. 6:9)? Because of our faith in His Son who saved us, we are now true, beloved children of our heavenly Father. Without faith in the Son we are under the Father's wrath, for our sins offend Him deeply. But His Son's sacrifice worked *propitiation*—that wonderful word that makes everything better—the Son's sacrifice worked propitiation for our sins so that the Father's anger is turned away from us forever and our status before the Father has drastically changed, and it shows in our prayer.

Without Christ's propitiation it was this: **"Your iniquities have made a separation between you and your God, and your sins have hidden His face from you so that He does** ***not*** **hear"**  (Is. 59:2). *With* Christ's propitiation it is now this: **"Before they call I will answer; while they are yet speaking I will hear"**  (Is. 65:24).

Back to the Holy Gospel, our Lord goes on to say,
> **I have said these things to you in figures of speech. The hour is coming when I will no longer speak to you in figures of speech but will tell you plainly about the Father. In that day you will ask in My name, and I do not say to you that I will ask the Father on your behalf; FOR THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVES YOU, because you have loved Me and have believed that I came from God.**

Belovèd in the Lord by faith in Jesus our status before the Father is quite clear: **THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVES YOU**. Not only are our sins forgiven and all charges are dropped, but we have the permanent, loving attention of the Father who now calls us *My children*. Now—wouldn't you know?—I actually did see all my own children yesterday, and I do love them a lot. But I am only an earthly father. Our status before our *heavenly* Father can only be better because He is better at loving His children than I am at loving mine. **FOR THE FATHER HIMSELF LOVES YOU.**  We have the the love of Jesus for us and we have the love of Jesus for His Father which worked the love of our heavenly Father toward us as His true children, who believe in His Son, Jesus.

Our Lord Jesus continues, **"I came from the Father and have come into the world, and now I am leaving the world and going to the Father."**  That is our reminder that Ascension is this Thursday.
> **\[Jesus'] disciples said, "Ah, now You are speaking plainly and not using figurative speech! Now we know that You know all things and do not need anyone to question You; this is why we believe that You came from God." Jesus answered them, "Do you now believe? Behold, the hour is coming, indeed it has come, when you will be scattered, each to his own home, and will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, for the Father is with Me. I have said these things to you, that in me you may have peace. In the world you will have tribulation. But take heart; I have overcome the world."**

We always have peace, knowing that God is our true Father and that we are His true children.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes