---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 26, 2025
title: WHAT NOT TO DO AND WHAT HE HAS DONE
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Lent midweek
readings:
  - Matt. 23:1-12
sermon_text: Matt. 23:1-12
bible_version: ESV
---

|                  |         |                                    |            |
| ---------------- | ------- | ---------------------------------- | ---------- |
| **Opening Hymn** | LSB 420 | Christ, the Life of All the Living | vs 1,5,6,7 |
| **Sermon Hymn**  | LSB 615 | When in the Hour of Deepest Need   | vs1-4      |
| **Closing Hymn** | LSB 606 | I Lay My Sins on Jesus             | 3vs        |
# WHAT NOT TO DO AND WHAT HE HAS DONE

Belovèd in the Lord, we are again today at the Tuesday of Holy Week. We were on the same day last week when Jesus proclaimed the resurrection of the dead to the Sadduccees and told the scribe, who knew about loving God and his neighbor, **"You are not far from the kingdom of God"**  (Mark 12:34b). We are not far from the kingdom of God when we love God with all our heart and with all our soul and with all our mind and with all our strength, and our neighbor as ourselves, *but* we can't get all the way there without believing in Christ, the Suffering Servant who bore our sins and in whose Name we are forgiven.

Today we will stay on this same Tuesday, in the temple; this time recorded in Matthew, chapter 22. We have this serious parable:

> **The kingdom of heaven may be compared to a king who gave a wedding feast for his son, and sent his servants to call those who were invited to the wedding feast, but they would not come. Again he sent other servants, saying, "Tell those who are invited, 'See, I have prepared my dinner, my oxen and my fat calves have been slaughtered, and everything is ready. Come to the wedding feast.' " But they paid no attention and went off, one to his farm, another to his business, while the rest seized his servants, treated them shamefully, and killed them. The king was angry, and he sent his troops and destroyed those murderers and burned their city. Then he said to his servants, "The wedding feast is ready, but those invited were not worthy. Go therefore to the main roads and invite to the wedding feast as many as you find." And those servants went out into the roads and gathered all whom they found,**  ***both bad and good*. So the wedding hall was filled with guests.**

Belovèd in the Lord, remember that Jesus says that the **servants gathered all whom they found,** ***both bad and good*** to come *\[altar]*  to the wedding feast.
> **But when the king came in to look at the guests, he saw there a man who had no wedding garment. And he said to him, "Friend, how did you get in here without a wedding garment?" And he was speechless. Then the king said to the attendants, "Bind him hand and foot and cast him into the outer darkness. In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth." For many are called, but few are chosen.**  (Matt. 22:2–14)

I believe the wedding garment to repentance. Without precious repentance—without turning away from sin—there Jesus is not waiting and the wedding feast is not for us.

Next we turn to the first twelve verses of Matthew, chapter 23, which also happen on the Tuesday of Holy Week in the temple. ***The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat***—this is again Bible shorthand—a phrase to remember. If you aren't familiar with the phrase ***The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat***, tonight's the night to become familiar with it. The scribes and Pharisees are experts in … the Law of Moses. They are teachers of God's Commandments, so they are in Moses' seat, so to speak. Just as Moses taught God's Law to the Israelites, so the scribes and Pharisees teach what Moses has taught—it a seat of honor to teach what Moses taught the people—***The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat*.**

But now,
> **The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat, so do and observe whatever they tell you, … but not the works they do.**  ***For they preach, but do not practice*.**

Doesn't that sound like *practice what you preach*? It does! It is! This passage of the Bible, from the Tuesday of Holy Week, is from where *practice what you preach* comes from. So what do we mean when we use the Bible shorthand ***The scribes and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat***? It means that the scribes and Pharisees are hypocrites—they teach one thing but do the other—they do *not* practice what they preach. What's worse is that they teach in God's name and bring dishonor to God's name by not keeping the Commandments that God has called them to teach and demonstrate to His people. The scribes and the Pharisees may sit on Moses' seat, but they are in gross violation of the Second Commandment, **"You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God,"**  and they make mockery of the Lord's Prayer when we pray,
> **Hallowed be Thy name.**  *How is God's name kept holy?*  God's name is kept holy when the Word of God is taught in its truth and purity, and we, as the children of God, also lead holy lives according to it. Help us to do this, dear Father in heaven! *But anyone who teaches or lives contrary to God's Word profanes the name of God among us*. Protect us from this, heavenly Father!

The scribes and Pharisees are our example of WHAT NOT TO DO.

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, we also have WHAT HE HAS DONE—what our Lord Jesus has done for us. For we all learn from watching others. Watch the scribes and Pharisees to learn WHAT NOT TO DO. Watch Jesus to learn WHAT HE HAS DONE for us.

But before we watch Him, let's listen to Him teach; then we'll watch Him. Our Lord teaches,
> **Neither be called instructors, for you have one instructor, the Christ.**  ***The greatest among you shall be your servant*.**

We have the rest of Holy Week to behold Christ going forth as a servant, bearing our sins and suffering for it; yet He is the greatest among us. Tonight is the night to underline what Christ has done for us *as our Suffering Servant prophesied by Isaiah*. We will underline that Christ is our Suffering Servant by hearing, over and over again, what was foretold of Him by Isaiah.

We have, in Isaiah, chapter 42:
> **Behold** ***my servant*, whom I uphold, my chosen, in whom my soul delights; I have put my Spirit upon him; he will bring forth justice to the nations.** ***He will not cry aloud or lift up his voice, or make it heard in the street*; a bruised reed he will not break, and a faintly burning wick he will not quench; he will faithfully bring forth justice. He will not grow faint or be discouraged till he has established justice in the earth; and the coastlands wait for his law.**  (Is. 42:1–4)

We have, in Isaiah, chapter 49:
> **And now the LORD says, he who formed me from the womb** ***to be his servant*, to bring Jacob back to him; and that Israel might be gathered to him—for I am honored in the eyes of the LORD, and my God has become my strength—he says: "It is too light a thing that you should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob and to bring back the preserved of Israel; I will make you as a light for the nations, that my salvation may reach to the end of the earth." Thus says the LORD, the Redeemer of Israel and his Holy One,** ***to one deeply despised, abhorred by the nation, the servant of rulers*: "Kings shall see and arise; princes, and they shall prostrate themselves; because of the LORD, who is faithful, the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen you."**  (Is. 49:5–7)

We have, in Isaiah, chapter 50:
> **The Lord GOD has given me the tongue of those who are taught, that I may know how to sustain with a word him who is weary. Morning by morning he awakens; he awakens my ear to hear as those who are taught. The Lord GOD has opened my ear, and I was not rebellious; I turned not backward.** ***I gave my back to those who strike, and my cheeks to those who pull out the beard; I hid not my face from disgrace and spitting.***  (Is. 50:4–6)

Here we learn a detail of Christ's suffering that is not recorded in the Gospels: His beard was pulled out.

And, finally, we have Isaiah's prophecy of the Suffering Servant in chapters 52 and 53. Our Lord Jesus was prophesied to be our Suffering Servant who ***was pierced for our transgressions and crushed for our sins; the punishment that brought us peace was upon Him; and by His wounds, by His wounds, we are healed***. Let us ever watch and learn from Him how He has saved us and how we are to follow His servant example.
> **Behold, my servant shall act wisely; he shall be high and lifted up, and shall be exalted. As many were astonished at you—*his appearance was so marred, beyond human semblance, and his form beyond that of the children of mankind*—so shall he sprinkle many nations. Kings shall shut their mouths because of him, for that which has not been told them they see, and that which they have not heard they understand.**


> **Who has believed what he has heard from us? And to whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed? For he grew up before him like a young plant, and like a root out of dry ground;** ***he had no form or majesty that we should look at him, and no beauty that we should desire him. He was despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; and as one from whom men hide their faces he was despised, and we esteemed him not*.**


The prophecy continues in Isaiah 53 and is the basis for the hymn that we often sing with the Praise Team: *By His Wounds*.
> **Surely** ***he has borne our griefs and carried our sorrows; yet we esteemed him stricken, smitten by God, and afflicted. But he was pierced for our transgressions; he was crushed for our iniquities; upon him was the chastisement that brought us peace, and with his wounds we are healed*. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned—every one—to his own way;** ***and the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all*.**


> ***He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and like a sheep that before its shearers is silent, so he opened not his mouth. By oppression and judgment he was taken away*; and as for his generation, who considered that** ***he was cut off out of the land of the living, stricken for the transgression of my people*? And they made his grave with the wicked and with a rich man in his death, although he had done no violence, and there was no deceit in his mouth.**


> **Yet** ***it was the will of the LORD to crush him; he has put him to grief*; when his soul makes an offering for guilt, he shall see his offspring; he shall prolong his days; the will of the LORD shall prosper in his hand. Out of the anguish of his soul he shall see and be satisfied; by his knowledge shall** ***the righteous one, my servant, make many to be accounted righteous, and he shall bear their iniquities*. Therefore I will divide him a portion with the many, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he poured out his soul to death and was numbered with the transgressors; yet he bore the sin of many, and makes intercession for the transgressors.** (Is. 52:3–53:12)


Belovèd in the Lord, Isaiah's prophecy of the Suffering Servant has been fulfilled in Christ. WHAT CHRIST HAS DONE is that He has saved us from our sins and given us His voice to follow. Belovèd in the Lord,
> **have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself,** ***by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross*. Therefore God has highly exalted him and bestowed on him the name that is above every name, so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the earth, and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.**  (Phil. 2:5–11) Amen.


## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
The reading happens, again, on the Tuesday of Holy Week. But here are more events from the Tuesday of Holy Week. The AAT indicates that Jesus would have said this in the Temple.

Matthew 22:10
\[10] And those servants went out into the roads and gathered all whom they found, *both bad and good*. So the wedding hall was filled with guests. (ESV)

Matthew 22:11
\[11] “But when the king came in to look at the guests, he saw there a man who had no wedding garment. (ESV)

Perhaps this wedding garment is repentance.