---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 5, 2025
title: RETURN TO DUST
occasion: Ash Wednesday
readings:
  - Gen. 3:14-19
sermon_text: Gen. 3:14-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# RETURN TO DUST

Belovèd in the Lord, our theme for this year's Lenten midweek sermons is *Three Days of Holy Week*. That is, Holy Week begins with Palm Sunday. Then come the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday of Holy Week; on these three days we will have no services. The next time we do have a service during Holy Week is on Maundy *Thursday*, then Good *Friday*, of course. We will not have a service on Holy *Saturday*, *\[understatement]*  but then we will have services on Easter Sunday, the celebration of our Lord's Resurrection. Between Palm Sunday and Maundy Thursday, then, there are three days: the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday of Holy Week, which we are wont to skip over; no services are scheduled. Nevertheless, we will not skip over them this year! These Three Days of Holy Week—Holy Monday, Holy Tuesday, and Holy Wednesday—call them holy for Holy Week—these three days will be the theme of our midweek Lenten services.

We will start with the Monday of Holy Week *next* week. For today is Ash Wednesday, the day to remember how we got in all this trouble. We remember Adam's fall into sin in the Garden of Eden. Without the Fall there would be no Lent, without the Fall there would be nothing to repent of, without the Fall we would not need a Savior.

We have for our reading tonight the curses that the LORD spoke upon Satan, upon Eve, and then upon Adam after Adam and Eve were deceived and ate the forbidden fruit. Let us hear these curses again, and mourn.

**"The LORD God said** ***to the serpent*, 'Because you have done this, cursed are you above all livestock and above all beasts of the field; on your belly you shall go, and dust you shall eat all the days of your life.' "**  And till this day we have slithering snakes. How they moved before, I don't know.

**"I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her Seed; He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise His heel."**  *Enmity* means *enemies*. There is much enmity in the world today—too many enemies, too many fights, too much war. But this verse is not a prophecy of the wars to come: it is the prophecy for us to hold up our heads because of a battle against the devil to be won for us by our Savior Jesus Christ.
> ***To the woman*** **\[God] said, "I will surely multiply your pain in childbearing; in pain you shall bring forth children. Your desire shall be for your husband, and he shall rule over you."**

And by the husband ruling over his wife, since this is listed among the Lord's curses, I believe it indicates the abuse that dominating husbands have inflicted on their wives, not the loving, self-sacrificial authority of a Christian husband (Eph. 5:25). Abuse of wives would be unknown had Adam only listened to God's Word.
> **And to Adam \[God] said, "Because you have listened to the voice of your wife and have eaten of the tree of which I commanded you, 'You shall not eat of it,' cursed is the ground because of you; in pain you shall eat of it all the days of your life.**

The words that Eve spoke to Adam when she offered him the forbidden fruit are not recorded. But if they were, they would be enshrined in the Hall of Infamy. Adam should have ignored her—imagine what the world would be today if he had only run away and clung solely to what *God* had said: **"You may surely eat of every tree of the garden, but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely die"**  (Gen. 2:16b–17). Because Adam listened to Eve and ignored the LORD, the ground that we weed today—the ground from which we pull thistles—the ground is cursed and does not readily yield food for us as it did before the Fall.
> **Thorns and thistles it shall bring forth for you; and you shall eat the plants of the field. By the sweat of your face you shall eat bread, till you return to the ground, for out of it you were taken;**  ***for you are dust, and to dust you shall return*.**

Here God declares the decay of death rather gently as a returning to the ground. But you, who are living and breathing here today, whose smiling faces and voices mean the world to me and to those who know you—the precious memories we have of each other and will again make in the future—these precious moments all come from living, breathing people. But it will all come to an end, to our great sorrow. Had Adam only listened to God and not to his wife—for, again, this curse is spoken directly to Adam—had Adam only listened to God we would always have each other—we would never die—we would have no reason to mourn. You and I are face-to-face with this verdict: RETURN TO DUST. It will all come to an end. There comes a time when no longer are we there for someone, and no longer is that someone there for us. How very, very sad.

Now, **just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned** (Rom. 5:12)—just as sin came through Adam, it has spread to all of us and the verdict remains: **you are dust, and to dust you shall return**. Our lives on this earth will come to an end. *\[Point to cemetery]*  The grave awaits—doctors will fail, medications will fail—but Christ will not.

For belovèd in the Lord, **"He knows our frame;** ***He remembers that we are dust*"**  (Ps. 103:14). And as we have heard it before we now hear it again. In the middle of all the curses in the Garden *God tucked in one blessing that beams brighter than all the curses*. Again, we hear this blessing that the LORD addresses to Satan: **"I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her Seed; He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise His heel."**  God declares to Satan, presumably with Adam and Eve listening—God declares to Satan that the Seed of the Woman will bruise his head but he, the serpent, will also bruise the heel of the Seed of Eve. God puts it forth as a riddle, but it's all there: Satan will be defeated—he will deceive man no more. The Seed of the Woman will see to it that Satan's head is crushed and his power over us is overthrown. Jesus Christ is the promised Seed of the Woman.

But to win this victory for us, Satan will *\[Crucifixion]*  bruise Christ's heel, and being bitten by a snake can be dangerous, even fatal. Time will tell how Christ will be bitten and die on the Cross. (This is why the ashes on your forehead are in the form of Christ's Cross.) But God remembers that we are dust, and what He will work though the Cross will not only destroy Satan's power—He will absorb all punishment that our sins deserve. God remembers that we are dust, and what He will work through the Cross will not only destroy Satan's power—He will remove our sins from us as far as the east is from the west (Ps. 103:12)—take away all remembrance of our sin so that Satan can no longer accuse us. God remembers that we are dust, *\[Resurrection]*  and what He will work through the Cross will not only destroy Satan's power—He will make our dust live again, never to die.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes