---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 9, 2025
title: A TERRIBLE DEAL
occasion: 5th Sunday in Lent midweek
readings:
  - Luke 22:1-6
sermon_text: Luke 22:1-6
bible_version: ESV
---

# A TERRIBLE DEAL
> **Judas went away and conferred with the chief priests and officers how he might betray \[Jesus] to them. And they were glad, and agreed to give him money.**

Judas went to the Jewish leaders to make a deal on the Wednesday of Holy Week. You may be interested to know that there is not much recorded in the Bible about the Wednesday of Holy Week—lots about Tuesday and Thursday but not that much about Wednesday. As far as I can tell, it is difficult to say what our Lord Jesus did on this Wednesday. He may have been anointed at Bethany at the house of Simon the leper (also Matt. 26:6–13).
> **While \[Jesus] was at Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as He was reclining at table, a woman came with an alabaster flask of ointment of pure nard, very costly, and she broke the flask and poured it over His head. There were some who said to themselves indignantly, "Why was the ointment wasted like that? For this ointment could have been sold for more than three hundred denarii and given to the poor." And they scolded her. But Jesus said, "Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a beautiful thing to Me. For you always have the poor with you, and whenever you want, you can do good for them. But you will not always have Me. She has done what she could; she has anointed My body beforehand for burial. And truly, I say to you, wherever the gospel is proclaimed in the whole world, what she has done will be told in memory of her."**  (Mark 14:3–9)

Let us always keep her memory precious, for this unnamed woman anointed our Lord's body beforehand for burial.

But our Lord may have been anointed more than once at Bethany. An earlier anointing is recorded in John's Gospel:
> **Six days before the Passover,**  \[that is, the Saturday before Palm Sunday,] **Jesus therefore came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, whom Jesus had raised from the dead. So they gave a dinner for Him there. Martha served, and Lazarus was one of those reclining with Him at table.**  ***Mary*** **therefore took a pound of expensive ointment made from pure nard, and anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the perfume. But** ***Judas Iscariot*, one of His disciples (he who was about to betray Him), said, "Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii and given to the poor?" \[Judas] said this, not because he cared about the poor, but because** ***he was a thief*, and having charge of the moneybag he used to help himself to what was put into it.**  (John 12:1–6)

Again, this happened the Saturday *before* Holy Week. But with this anointing we are made aware of Judas Iscariot stealing money from the apostles' moneybag.
> The Seventh Commandment. **You shall not steal.**  *What does this mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not take our neighbor's money or possessions, or get them in any dishonest way, but help him to improve and protect his possessions and income.

We ourselves may have broken this commandment, just like Judas did. But now, on the Wednesday of Holy Week,
> **Judas went away and conferred with the chief priests and officers how he might betray \[Jesus] to them. And they were glad, and agreed to give him money.**

Judas goes to the Jewish leaders to make a deal, and risks the Lord for money.

*\[Illustration] Let's Make a Deal* is a game show. You're dressed up as an avocado, and the host presents you with the opportunity to risk what you have for a chance to get something bigger and better. The catch is that you don't know what bigger and better really is—you *hope* it's *really* bigger and better. The grand prize may be a Pontiac Grand Ville or a trip to Acapulco, but it's hidden behind a curtain. First, risk what you have and then find out what's behind the curtain. *Sometimes* the grand prize is … do you remember? … sometimes, on *Let's Make a Deal*, the grand prize that you have risked everything for is a llama. Sometimes the grand prize that you have risked everything for is a pair of goats—something you have no use for. You've been *zonked* on *Let's Make a Deal*—you went for the grand prize that is no grand prize at all.

Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve chosen apostles, is about to be *beyond* zonked. He has taken money from the chief priests and officers to betray the Christ. The Jewish officers and chief priests want Jesus dead because He calls Himself God and the people believe in Him. They want Jesus dead and they see an opportunity in Judas to make it happen.

But we are told something about Judas in tonight's reading that I find to be the most terrifying verse of the Bible. *\[Direct]*  Please open your bulletin to tonight's reading and tell me what verse you might think is so bad. … It is verse 3: **"Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve."**  We are told of many in the Bible who were demon-possessed, but Judas is the only one of whom it is written that Satan himself entered into him. Judas became like the serpent in the Garden of Eden. This is terrifying. John's Gospel records that the devil had put it into the heart of Judas Iscariot to betray Christ (John 13:2). This, no matter how you say it, as far as I understand anything, is the most horrible state of affairs for Judas.

For 2,000 years there has been speculation about him. One of them is this: was Judas ever a Christian? He was one of the twelve disciples, after all. In Matthew, chapter 10 it is written that Christ **called to Him his twelve disciples and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every affliction** (Matt. 10:1). Without faith in Christ, I believe the unclean spirits would have overthrown Judas like the unclean spirit that overthrew the sons of Sceva (Acts 19:14–16). But there is no report in the Bible that this ever happened. Scripture implies that Judas *was* a believer.

What is terrifying is that what happened to Judas could happen to you or me. Judas gave in to theft and look what happened. I might give in to sexual immorality—or even looking at it. You might give in to gossiping. God forbid! Without repentance and faith in Jesus we learn from Judas that hell is on the other side. Judas made A TERRIBLE DEAL.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have these Scriptures to which to cling. We have 1 Peter, chapter 5:
> **Be sober-minded; be watchful. Your adversary the devil prowls around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour.**  ***Resist him*, firm in your faith, knowing that the same kinds of suffering are being experienced by your brotherhood throughout the world.**  (1 Pet. 5:8–9)

If we only resist him we have the promise recorded in 1 Corinthians, chapter 10:
> **No temptation has overtaken you that is not common to man. God is faithful, and He will not let you be tempted beyond your ability, but with the temptation He will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it.**  (1 Cor. 10:13)

We thank and praise the Holy Spirit for such endurance! And we have 1 John, chapter 3:
> **Whoever makes a practice of sinning is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. The reason the Son of God appeared was to destroy the works of the devil.**  (1 John 3:8)

And, belovèd in the Lord, we have Good Friday, where our Lord Jesus does destroy the works of the devil among us who cling to Him in faith. Judas's betrayal brings on the Cross on which Satan mocks the Messiah. Mock Him as he may, the serpent's head is crushed (Gen. 3:15). Jesus may be dead, but we are forgiven and He will live again. The serpent's head is crushed and he is headed to the lake of fire (Rev. 20:10).

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
This happens on the Wednesday of Holy Week.

Luke 22:21–22
\[21] But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table. \[22] For the Son of Man goes as it has been determined, but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed!” (ESV)

John 6:70–71
\[70] Jesus answered them, “Did I not choose you, the twelve? And yet one of you is a devil.” \[71] He spoke of Judas the son of Simon Iscariot, for he, one of the twelve, was going to betray him. (ESV)

Here's [an article](https://blog.adw.org/2021/03/what-was-the-lord-doing-on-wednesday-of-holy-week/) about what our Lord may have been doing on the Wednesday of Holy Week.