---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 2, 2025
title: CRUCIFIED, YET GLORIFIED
occasion: 4th Sunday in Lent midweek
readings:
  - John 12:23-36
sermon_text: John 12:23-36
bible_version: ESV
---

|         |                                            |        |
| ------- | ------------------------------------------ | ------ |
| LSB 439 | O Dearest Jesus, What Law Hast Thou Broken | vs 1-4 |
| LSB 425 | When I Survey the Wondrous Cross           | 4vs    |
| LSB 611 | Chief of Sinners Though I Be               | vs1-4  |
# CRUCIFIED, YET GLORIFIED

Belovèd in the Lord, for the last two midweek services we have heard our Lord Jesus teach on the Tuesday of Holy Week.
* Our Lord challenged the Sadducees about the resurrection of the dead and taught that **"\[God] is not God of the dead, but of the** ***living*"**  (Mark 12:27a).
* On this day He taught us the most important Commandment: **"Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one. And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength."**  (Mark 12:29b–30)
* On this day He taught us the Parable of the Wedding Feast, were God fills the wedding hall with guests, *both bad and good* (Matt. 22:10)—note that He mentions the bad first.
* And on this day He taught us, **"Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted"**  (Matt. 23:12).

All this in a single day, and we're not even finished with the Tuesday of Holy Week. Preparing these sermons has left an impression on me. This single day, the Tuesday of Holy Week, is a magnificent demonstration of God's living Word.
> **For the Word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints and of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart.**  (Heb. 4:12)

Our Lord Jesus, on the Tuesday of Holy Week, teaches us His living Word in abundance.

*\[Transition]*  Belovèd in the Lord, tonight we'll stay with the Tuesday of Holy Week before moving on next week to Wednesday, for our Lord has much to teach us. He says, to set the theme for today, **"The hour has come for the Son of Man to be** ***glorified*."**  He frames what He is about to say—that we listen closely now and remember His Word when we behold Him crucified—CRUCIFIED, YET GLORIFIED.
> **"I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to Myself." He \[says] this to show** ***by what kind of death he \[is] going to die*.**

When our Lord says ***lifted up from the earth***, it is not His Resurrection or His Ascension He's talking about: He's talking about *His Crucifixion*—His abused body being nailed to the Cross—humiliated, degraded. Then His body, still nailed to the Cross, being lifted up, that is, the bottom of the Cross set in a post hole so that Christ is lifted up on the Cross for everyone to see. There are those who mock Him: **"All who see Me mock Me; they make mouths at Me; they wag their heads"**  (Ps. 22:7). But if the mockers would only listen to the prophets and believe, they would see that Jesus of Nazareth is the promised Christ, who, lifted up on the Cross, is saving them from their sins, and they would be *drawn to Him* instead of mocking Him.

Those who mock Jesus are of no account, for they are blind to see that God is *glorified* when Christ is *crucified*—CRUCIFIED, YET GLORIFIED. Belovèd in the Lord, by the grace of the Spirit may we always keep in our hearts this most wonderful paradox—that the horrid Cross is in fact wonderful *for us*—death for Christ, but life for us. As Christ dies He turns the most degrading punishment into *the* defining demonstration of God's glory—He turns the devil's darkness into the light of God's sacrificial love straining to save His sinful creatures from the devil. He suffers and dies for us. His love for us is boundless and it is in full display on the Cross! God is most certainly glorified. Christ explains this to us on Tuesday so that we understand what we see on Friday.

Our Lord continues, **"Truly, truly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it bears much fruit."**  Christ is soon to die and be buried. He will rise and bear much fruit. But, belovèd in the Lord, He is not the only one to die and bear much fruit. With these living Words Christ prophesies about *us*. The paradox of the Cross will also shape our lives as we follow Jesus—you and I will first die, and then we will bear much fruit.

We have a parallel passage in John, chapter 15 to help us understand what we have ahead of us:
> **I am the true vine, and my Father is the vinedresser. Every branch in Me that does not bear fruit Me takes away, and every branch that does bear fruit** ***He prunes*, that it may bear** ***more fruit*.**  (John 15:1–2)

In other words, the Father's pruning feels to us like we're dying. When our heavenly Father prunes us we feel like we're dying—He has lopped off a part of us and it hurts! It makes no sense at the moment, but it will make glorious sense if we only trust His pruning and patiently bear the fruit for which He has graciously prepared us. CRUCIFIED, YET GLORIFIED even applies to *our lives here on earth* as we follow Jesus. By God's Word we know to keep an eye out for the fruit He wants us to bear.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
This also happens on the Tuesday of Holy Week.

a magnificent demonstration of God's living Word while death looms

We've just gotten into tonight's reading and you get the idea that the Tuesday of Holy Week can turn in a wonderful lengthy, sermon. I can only say that it is pure joy to plumb the depths of Christ's teaching on any day. I will conclude with what our Lord tells us this day about the devil: **"Now is the judgment of this world; now will the ruler of this world be cast out."**  In short, the Cross spells the devil's defeat. There is a passage in Luke that describes the devil being thrown out of heaven (Luke 10:18b–20) and another in Revelation that says the devil is angry here on earth because he knows his time is short (Rev. 12:12).