---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 19, 2025
title: WE'RE NOT QUITE THERE, BUT JESUS IS.
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Lent midweek
readings:
  - Mark 12:28-37
sermon_text: Mark 12:28-37
bible_version: ESV
---

# WE'RE NOT QUITE THERE, BUT JESUS IS.
Belovèd in the Lord, we heard last week that on the Monday of Holy Week our Lord overturned the tables of the moneychangers (Mark 11:15). Today we have arrived at the Tuesday of Holy Week.
> **Sadducees came to \[Jesus], who say that there is no resurrection. And they asked him a question, saying, "Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies and leaves a wife, but leaves no child, the man must take the widow and raise up offspring for his brother. There were seven brothers; the first took a wife, and when he died left no offspring. And the second took her, and died, leaving no offspring. And the third likewise. And the seven left no offspring. Last of all the woman also died. In the resurrection, when they rise again, whose wife will she be? For the seven had her as wife."**  (Mark 12:18–23)

Remember this one? It happens on the Tuesday of Holy Week, and our Lord puts the Sadducees in their place.
> **Jesus said to \[the Sadducees], "Is this not the reason you are wrong, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God? For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven. And as for the dead being raised, have you not read in the book of Moses, in the passage about the bush, how God spoke to him, saying, 'I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob'? He is not God of the dead, but of the living. You are quite wrong."**  (Mark 12:24–27)

So the Sadducees have been put in their place and the scribes couldn't be happier, for they are the theological adversaries of the Sadducees. **"And one of the scribes came up and heard them disputing with one another, and seeing that \[Jesus] answered them well, asked Him, 'Which commandment is the most important of all?' "**  With Jesus just having proved that He's the adversary of the Sadducees—did He not tell them, **"You are quite wrong"** ?—how well do you suppose the Sadduccees liked being told, **"You know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God"** ?—how well do you suppose they like their pet doctrine being overthrown, that there is no resurrection of the dead? Christ has rebuked the Sadduccees, and, boy, will He ever rebuke them for their false doctrine when He Himself rises from the dead! Alleluia!

The scribes consider themselves experts of the Law, and they are, in fact, highly trained in the Bible, and especially in the Law of Moses. So it is a show of respect that one of the scribes would ask Jesus, **"Which commandment is the most important of all?"**  And our Lord answers straight from the Law of Moses. First, from Deuteronomy, chapter 6:
> **The most important is, "Hear, O Israel: The Lord our God, the Lord is one. And you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul and with all your mind and with all your strength."**

Then from Leviticus, chapter 19:
> **The second is this: "You shall love your neighbor as yourself." There is no other commandment greater than these.**

Amen. There, are we saved now? Do we just focus on loving God and our neighbor and we're saved—are we promised heaven now? Hear our Lord's answer: " **You are** ***not far*** **from the kingdom of God."**  ***Not far*** … also means *you're not quite there*.

If you and I could love the Lord our God with all of our heart and soul and mind and strength seven days a week and twenty-four hours each day, we would never be in violation of the first three Commandments. We would never fail to fear, love, and trust in God above all things. We would never misuse His name. And we would always remember the Sabbath day, keeping it holy.

But you and I know how feeble and faint our love of God can be.

And if we could truly love our neighbor as ourselves—always and perfectly—we would never be in violation of the fourth through the tenth Commandments. We would always honor our father and mother. We would never kill, let alone want to hurt anyone. We would never commit adultery, even in our thoughts. We would never take what belongs to our neighbor. We would never do or say anything that would hurt our neighbor's reputation and good name. And we would never even have the desire to take what belongs to our neighbor.

WE'RE NOT QUITE THERE, BUT JESUS IS.

The Good News, belovèd in the Lord, is that the One talking with the scribe is the One True God who knows very well that *we're not quite there*—who knows very well that sins that must be punished. Christ, who is speaking to the scribe, is the One True God who came to do for us what we could never do: keep His Law perfectly. He came to fulfill the His own Law perfectly not only by keeping the Law Himself, but by becoming the curse that is declared in Deuteronomy, chapter 21: **"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the Law by becoming a curse for us—for it is written, 'Cursed is everyone who is hanged on a tree' "**  (Gal. 3:13). Even for that Law, too, for the hanging on the tree, Jesus is here. Today is Tuesday. In three days He will be hanged on the Cross and cursed for us. There—God's Law is perfectly fulfilled in Him for the scribe, and for you and me here tonight.

And finally, Jesus quotes to us from Psalm 110:
> **How can the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David? David himself, in the Holy Spirit, declared, \[in Psalm 110,] "The Lord said to my Lord, 'Sit at My right hand, until I put Your enemies under your feet.' " David himself calls him Lord. So how is He his Son?**


The scribes know that the Christ is the Son of David. But Psalm 110 calls Him *Lord*, that is, *God* Himself. How can David's Son be Lord and God? He is the Son of David, true man, yet also the Son of God, true God.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
This happens on the Tuesday of Holy Week.