---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 12, 2025
title: ZZZ
occasion: 1st Sunday in Lent midweek
readings:
  - Mark 11:15-19
sermon_text: Mark 11:15-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# ZZZ


Belovèd in the Lord,

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I. Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday
#### A. Today is Monday
### II. Drove out the moneychangers
#### House of prayer
Isaiah 56:6–8
\[6] “And the foreigners who join themselves to the LORD,
to minister to him, to love the name of the LORD,
and to be his servants,
everyone who keeps the Sabbath and does not profane it,
and holds fast my covenant—
\[7] these I will bring to my holy mountain,
and make them joyful in my house of prayer;
their burnt offerings and their sacrifices
will be accepted on my altar;
**for my house shall be called a house of prayer**
**for all peoples**.”
\[8] The Lord GOD,
who gathers the outcasts of Israel, declares,
“I will gather yet others to him
besides those already gathered.” (ESV)

Instead it's a money-making machine.
#### B. Love of money
1 Timothy 6:10
\[10] For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evils. It is through this craving that **some have wandered away from the faith** and pierced themselves with many pangs. (ESV)

Danger! It is possible to wander away from the faith.
#### C. God is faithful
1 Corinthians 10:13
\[13] No temptation has overtaken you that is not common to man. **God is faithful**, and he will not let you be tempted beyond your ability, but with the temptation he will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it. (ESV)

1 John 1:9
\[9] If we confess our sins, **he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness**. (ESV)
## Notes
This happens on the Monday of Holy Week.