---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 19, 2025
title: DO WHATEVER HE TELLS YOU.
occasion: 2nd Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Is. 62:1-5
  - 1 Cor. 12:1-11
  - John 2:1-11
sermon_text: John 2:1-11
bible_version: ESV
---

# DO WHATEVER HE TELLS YOU.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, again we bring to mind that Epiphany traditionally focuses on three events concerning Christ after His birth:
* *\[Christmas]*  the visit of wise men, who followed the star to Christ in Bethlehem
* *\[Baptism]*  Christ's Baptism in the Jordan River by John the Baptist
* Christ's first miracle, changing water into wine, performed at the wedding at Cana

We have it all. Today we have for our Holy Gospel the wedding at Cana—our Lord's first miracle where He changes water into wine.

In case you didn't know it before you can know it now. Today's Holy Gospel is a traditional reading for weddings. If the wedding sermon is based on this text, it will generally go something like this: marriage is so honored by God that our Lord particularly chose a wedding for His first miracle.

But in case you thought that marriage is overplayed, turn to our Old Testament lesson from Isaiah, chapter 62. Marriage cannot be overplayed since God never tires to speak of it. We have, in the Old Testament lesson, Isaiah's prophechy that God's salvation is a marriage between God and His land.
> **You shall be a crown of beauty in the hand of the LORD, and a royal diadem in the hand of your God. You shall no more be termed Forsaken, and your land shall no more be termed Desolate, but you shall be called My Delight Is in Her, and your land Married; for the LORD delights in you, and your land shall be married.**  (Is. 62:3–4)

* No longer Forsaken, but
* My Delight is in Her
* Married

Christ seeks a marriage relation with His Church, even in the Old Testament. He wants her as His own bride in whom He delights, like in Song of Solomon. **"For as a young man marries a young woman, so shall your sons marry you, and as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall your God rejoice over you"**  (Is. 62:5). Marriage was created by God as a holy institution already in the Garden of Eden (Gen. 2:24; Matt. 19:5) and is never overplayed. In our Holy Gospel it seems apparent that our Lord is delighted with marriage so that He uses His power as Creator to make fine wine out of water—lots of fine wine—for all who celebrate this particular wedding at Cana.

*\[Transition]*  But you may be aware that expectations can lead to tensions at weddings. The bridesmaids dresses don't match the groomsmen's suits. It's too hot. We're out of wine. I want to focus, believe it or not, not on marriage but on the first five verses of the Holy Gospel. **"On the third day there was a wedding at Cana in Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there."**  Mary is here! How we love Mary and remember her fondly from the Christmas Gospels for her trust in anything God has to say.

**"Jesus also was invited to the wedding with his disciples."**  I cannot imagine any wedding held today where someone is invited and the couple says, "Sure, you can bring all your disciples." Weddings are expensive, and you know what happens to expenses when the head count goes up. I wonder how the planning went for this wedding in Cana and how many people were there and long the wedding lasted. In any case, here are Jesus and his disciples. I'll guess that the ceremony is over because the guests have started to drink wine, and you know how expensive that can get.

There's a lot we don't know about this wedding but one detail we know for sure: the wine runs out. Oh no! **"When the wine ran out, the mother of Jesus said to him, 'They have no wine.' "**  Mary speaks to her Son. At this point I will read into this situation based on what I have observed about expectations and tensions at weddings. Do the bride's guests sit on one side and the groom's guests sit on the other? Look, there are ten groom's guests and eighty bride's guests. What do we do? The guests are seated but the food is cold. What do we do? *The wine ran out.*  "What do we do?" asks Mary *from her Son*. The master of the feast is there; it's his responsibility like it was my uncle's responsibility and Trina's and my wedding reception. Still, Mary notifies *her Son* and not the master of the feast.

Now I'm reading into this moment thoughts that are not explicit in Scripture, and I, of course, revoke anything I say in error. But I am imagining a mode of speech employed here by Mary, in a delicate situation here at the wedding—a delicate mode of speech that is more airy than an aria, more heavenly than a motet—a mode of speech not unheard of between mothers and their sons. I am hearing Mary *nag* Jesus or at least discreetly suggest He do something.

We have only our Lord's response to gauge this supposition:
> **Woman, what does this have to do with me? My hour has not yet come.**

Lord, were you irritated with You mom? Only you know.

The hour for which Christ has come *\[Crucifixion]*  is, of course, the Cross. Let us not forget, though, how many He will heal and how many demons He will cast out. His miracles will be many, but this—the changing of water into wine—is marked as the first—our Lord's first miracle by which we are ever reminded of Christ's faithfulness to His Church and how marriage between a man and his wife reflects Christ's own faithfulness in this world. As for Christ's love for His Church we have, again, the Cross. Here we see that our Lord's love for us is purely sacrificial. "I GIVE YOU WHAT IS MINE AND TAKE WHAT IS YOURS." We give Him our sin—He dies for that—and He gives us His holiness with full forgiveness in return—and we live forever for that. Alleluia!

But getting back to that moment—the Savior of the world in a tense moment with His mother, Mary, whom we adore—getting back to this moment, we have a nagging mother and her Son who does not appear to believe that she should be reminding Him to do something. And He tells her,
> **Woman, what does this have to do with me? My hour has not yet come.**

How might a nagging mother respond to her Son's rebuke? (Can you even believe this is happening between Christ and His mother?) Now I am not a mother, but I bet you moms out there might be able to suggest a few options for how to respond to this Son. ( *\[Humor]*  Maybe this should be a text for Mother's Day.) I am imagining that in this situation Mary's flesh may be tempted to say something that is not salutary. But what she chooses to say to the servants, by the grace of the Spirit, is this: *\[under your breath]*  **"DO WHATEVER HE TELLS YOU."**

Belovèd in the Lord, these are again blessèd words from the mouth of Mary. From Christmas we remember she said to Gabriel, **"Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word"**  (Luke 1:38a). Today she says to the servants, **"DO WHATEVER HE TELLS YOU."**  These words will be heard again from heaven at Christ's Transfiguration: **"This is my Son, my Chosen One; listen to him!"**  (Luke 9:35b)


**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
At our Lord's Baptism

Matthew 3:17
\[17] and behold, a voice from heaven said, “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.” (ESV)

Mark 1:11
\[11] And a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.” (ESV)

Luke 3:22
\[22] and the Holy Spirit descended on him in bodily form, like a dove; and a voice came from heaven, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.” (ESV)

John 1:32–34
\[32] And John bore witness: “I saw the Spirit descend from heaven like a dove, and it remained on him. \[33] I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ \[34] And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.” (ESV)

At our Lord's Transfiguration

Luke 9:35
\[35] And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, “This is my Son, my Chosen One; listen to him!” (ESV)