---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: MMM DD, 2025
title: WE WILL COME TO HIM AND MAKE OUR HOME WITH HIM.
occasion: 67nd Sunday after the Sabbath
readings:
  - Gen. 11:1-9
  - Acts 2:1-21
  - John 14:23-31
sermon_text: John 14:23-31
bible_version: ESV
---

# WE WILL COME TO HIM AND MAKE OUR HOME WITH HIM.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, give us Your Spirit that You and Your Son may live in our hearts. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, I have been asked this question before, and, honestly, it gets asked again and again: would it not be better if Jesus did *not* ascend into heaven and just stayed here with us? This is a standard question. If our Lord were here in person we could ask Him about His view of the issues. If the Lord were here in person He could keep casting out demons, healing the sick, and feeding the thousands. If our Lord were here in person we could ask Him to make statements about the war in the Holy Land, or to go there Himself to sort things out. This is a legitimate question because He could do it if He wants—He could have just stayed here with us instead of ascending into heaven.

Did you know that our Lord Jesus answers that question in the Bible—why He didn't stay? Many of you already know this and I've brought it up before, but for sake of repetition, and that we may all know what our Lord says, here's His answer:
> **I tell you the truth: it is to** ***your advantage*** **that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you. But if I go, I will send Him to you.**  (John 16:7)

The Helper of which our Lord speaks is the Holy Spirit and today is Pentecost, the day the Holy Spirit was sent to Christ's Church as He promised would happen after His Ascension. The Nicene Creed teaches us that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Father and the Son, but the few details we have about how this really works is here in part. Christ's Ascension into heaven is somehow necessary for us to be given the Holy Spirit: **"For if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you."**  If Christ did not ascend, Pentecost would have never happened. There's something mechanical about Christ ascending and then the Holy Spirit coming down to us.

*\[Ask]*  Do you see the answer to the question, though? Christ could have stayed here if He wanted, but **"** ***it is to your advantage*** **that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you."**  Christ knows what's best for us better than we do. If we say, "Lord it's better for us that You stay here," the Lord answers, "No, it's not. **It is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you.** " We are better off with the Holy Spirit, *\[font]*  which is promised Craig with His Baptism (Acts 2:38) as it is promised to you and me in our Baptism into Christ. "But how wonderful it would be to have Christ present here to heal and teach!" But how much *more* wonderful to have the Spirit like we have Him right now. Belovèd in the Lord, we are truly blessed.

And in case we need a reminder of what our Lord says in the verses following His telling us of our advantage if He goes away and sends the Helper, He says,
> **When \[the Spirit] comes, He will convict the world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment:** ***concerning sin, because they do not believe in Me*; concerning righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you will see me no longer; concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world is judged.**  (John 16:8–11)

These verses are a sermon in themselves, but I will touch on the Spirit convicting us of sin. We do not like being told we're wrong, but someone's got to do it, or else we're in big trouble. *\[Ask]*  What if King David had not been convicted of His sin with Bathsheba (2 Sam. 12:13)? God would have dealt with David according to his sin and he'd be in hell with Judas. What a horrible state of affairs it would be if we did not have the Spirit with us now, constantly, to bless us with repentance—bless us with the conviction of our own sin and the ability turn away from it?

Our Lord says, **"concerning sin, because they do not believe in Me."**  What if we were convicted of our sin but had no knowledge of Jesus—we had never heard a preacher declare to us that Christ was crucified to win the forgiveness of our sins, that Christ is our Savior from sin and death? The Holy Spirit is here with us now as Christ is in heaven at the right hand of the Father—the Spirit is here to serve that we would know beyond a shadow of a doubt that the one-time offering of Christ on the Cross worked for us an eternal redemption from sin by means of His own holy, precious blood (Heb. 9:12). We are well-off indeed.

There is much to be said about the Spirit here among us. Once again, and I must emphasize, that the Spirit is promised us with our *\[font]*  Baptism. On this day of Pentecost, when the Spirit came upon the apostles in tongues of fire so that the apostles spoke in the tongues of the Parthians, Medes, Elamites, Mesopotamians, Judeans, and Cappadocians, along with the those who live in Pontus, Asia, Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, Libya, Rome, Crete, and Arabia—on this day of Pentecost the people asked the apostles,
> **"Brothers, what shall we do?" And Peter said to them, "Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For the promise is for you and for your children and for all who are far off, everyone whom the Lord our God calls to himself."**  (Acts 2:37b–39)


To participate in the work of the Holy Spirit we are directed by the apostle Peter *\[font]*  to be baptized in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (Matt. 28:19), like Craig was today. And we are promised
* forgiveness of all our sins, and
* the gift of the Holy Spirit.

There is not greater gift than our Baptism.

*\[Conclusion]*  The gift of the Holy Spirit places us in the body of Christ of which our Lord says in today's Holy Gospel, **"If anyone loves Me, he will keep My word, and My Father will love him, and WE WILL COME TO HIM AND MAKE OUR HOME WITH HIM."**  Belovèd in the Lord, I leave you with this thought from Christ's own lips. Some of our greatest yearning is for a home—you have it and I have this yearning, too. The Son and the Father also have this yearning. *\[Ask]*  Do they yearn for their old Kentucky home? Do they yearn to live in Cleveland? Christ says they yearn to make their home … in our hearts. *\[Pray]*  Gracious Father, give us Your Spirit that You and Your Son may live in our hearts. And this has got to be far better than Jesus still walking around on the earth.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Today is the Baptism of Craig at St. Mark.