---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 20, 2025
title: REFUGE IN CHRIST'S RESURRECTION
occasion: Easter Sunday
readings:
  - Is. 65:17-25
  - Ps. 16; antiphon v. 10
  - 1 Cor. 15:19-26
  - Luke 24:1-12
sermon_text: Ps. 16
bible_version: ESV
---

# REFUGE IN CHRIST'S RESURRECTION

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank You, heavenly Father, that Your Son's Resurrection is also ours, for You are the God of the living and we are Yours through Your Son Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! It may be Easter, but Pentecost is only seven weeks away. St. Peter's Pentecost sermon proclaims Christ's Resurrection as the fulfillment of Psalm 16:
> **Men of Israel, hear these words: Jesus of Nazareth, a Man attested to you by God with mighty works and wonders and signs that God did through Him in your midst, as you yourselves know—this Jesus, delivered up according to the definite plan and foreknowledge of God, you crucified and killed by the hands of lawless men.** ***God raised Him up*, loosing the pangs of death, because it was not possible for Him to be held by it. For David says concerning Him** (in Psalm 16) **,**
>
> **"I saw the Lord always before me, for He is at my right hand that I may not be shaken; therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced; my flesh also will dwell in hope. For You will not abandon my soul to Hades, or let Your Holy One see corruption. You have made known to me the paths of life; you will make me full of gladness with Your presence."**
>
> **Brothers, I may say to you with confidence about the patriarch David that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day. Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that he would set one of his descendants on his throne, he foresaw and spoke about** ***the Resurrection of the Christ*, that He was not abandoned to Hades, nor did His flesh see corruption. This Jesus God raised up, and of that we all are witnesses.**  (Acts 2:22–32)

Nothing to improve on here—the Holy Spirit opened Peter's mouth to preach Christ's Resurrection perfectly on Pentecost.

However, the *first* preachers of Christ's Resurrection are heard in today's Holy Gospel.
> **\[The women] found the stone rolled away from the tomb, but when they went in they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus. While they were perplexed about this, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling apparel. And as they were frightened and bowed their faces to the ground, the men said to them, "** ***Why do you seek the living among the dead*? He is not here, but has risen. Remember how He told you, while He was still in Galilee, that the Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of sinful men and be crucified and on the third day rise."**  (Luke 24:2–7)

" **Why do you seek the living among the dead?** That's silly. Don't you believe in the resurrection of the dead? Who do you think you are? Sadducees?"

Remember that the Sadducees deny the resurrection of the dead. And, of course, our Lord had a famous exchange with these sad Sadducees. You may remember that they tried to trick our Lord with that resurrection riddle. A woman married seven brothers, one after another as they died. Whose wife is she at the resurrection? Our Lord answered,
> **The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage, but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and to the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage, for they cannot die anymore, because they are equal to angels and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection. But that the dead** ***are*** **raised, even Moses showed, in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob.** ***Now He is not God of the dead, but of the living*, for all live to Him.**  (Luke 20:34b–38)

Belovèd in the Lord, for God to say He is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Ex. 3:6) means that Jacob, Isaac, and Abraham *are not dead*, though they died and were buried: they're alive. For God is not the God of the dead: God is the God of the *living*! With this Scripture from the burning bush Christ asserted to the Sadducees that the dead—anyone God calls by name—*are indeed resurrected*. Christ even told the silly Sadducees, **"You are wrong, because you know neither the Scriptures nor the power of God"**  (Matt. 22:29).

And so, with the help of St. Peter's Pentecost sermon, we know that Psalm 16 tells us of the Resurrection of the Christ-at least we know that Scripture. Christ's body saw not corruption before He was raised from the dead. However, what about your body and my body? *\[Cemetery]*  Over there at the cemetery, will our bodies see corruption? Yes, our bodies *will* decay. *But* **"You have made known to me the paths of life."**  And this path, belovèd in the Lord, is perfectly articulated for us by St. Paul:
> **But in fact Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep. For as by a man came death, by a man has come also** ***the resurrection of the dead*. For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ** ***shall all be made alive*.**  (1 Cor. 15:20–22)

In Christ we are forgiven all our sins at the Cross, and in Christ we, too, are made alive at His Resurrection. *\[Font]*  **"We were buried therefore with Him by Baptism into death, in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father,** ***we too*** **might walk in newness of life"**  (Rom. 6:4). Is it not wonderful that our God calls us by name and washes us with water to cleanse us of our sins and to raise us from the dead with immortal bodies like the body Christ has right now in heaven? Our God is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
> **The sorrows of those who run after another god shall multiply; their drink offerings of blood I will not pour out or take their names on my lips. The LORD is my chosen portion and my cup; you hold my lot. The lines have fallen for me in pleasant places; indeed, I have a beautiful inheritance.**

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Exodus 3:4–6
\[4] When the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him out of the bush, “Moses, Moses!” And he said, “Here I am.” \[5] Then he said, “Do not come near; take your sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground.” \[6] And he said, “I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.” And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God. (ESV)

Psalm 49:15
\[15] But God will ransom my soul from the power of Sheol,
for he will receive me. Selah (ESV)

Isaiah 25:1
\[1] O LORD, you are my God;
I will exalt you; I will praise your name,
for you have done wonderful things,
plans formed of old, faithful and sure. (ESV)

Isaiah 25:6–9
\[6] On this mountain the LORD of hosts will make for all peoples
a feast of rich food, a feast of well-aged wine,
of rich food full of marrow, of aged wine well refined.
\[7] And he will swallow up on this mountain
the covering that is cast over all peoples,
the veil that is spread over all nations.
\[8] He will swallow up death forever;
and the Lord GOD will wipe away tears from all faces,
and the reproach of his people he will take away from all the earth,
for the LORD has spoken.
\[9] It will be said on that day,
“Behold, this is our God; we have waited for him, that he might save us.
This is the LORD; we have waited for him;
let us be glad and rejoice in his salvation.” (ESV)

Isaiah 26:19
\[19] Your dead shall live; their bodies shall rise.
You who dwell in the dust, awake and sing for joy!
For your dew is a dew of light,
and the earth will give birth to the dead. (ESV)

Isaiah 53:10
\[10] Yet it was the will of the LORD to crush him;
he has put him to grief;
when his soul makes an offering for guilt,
he shall see his offspring; he shall prolong his days;
the will of the LORD shall prosper in his hand. (ESV)

Ezekiel 37:12–14
\[12] Therefore prophesy, and say to them, Thus says the Lord GOD: Behold, I will open your graves and raise you from your graves, O my people. And I will bring you into the land of Israel. \[13] And you shall know that I am the LORD, when I open your graves, and raise you from your graves, O my people. \[14] And I will put my Spirit within you, and you shall live, and I will place you in your own land. Then you shall know that I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it, declares the LORD.” (ESV)

Daniel 12:2
\[2] And many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt. (ESV)

Hosea 6:1–2
\[1] “Come, let us return to the LORD;
for he has torn us, that he may heal us;
he has struck us down, and he will bind us up.
\[2] After two days he will revive us;
on the third day he will raise us up,
that we may live before him. (ESV)

Hosea 13:14
\[14] I shall ransom them from the power of Sheol;
I shall redeem them from Death.
O Death, where are your plagues?
O Sheol, where is your sting?
Compassion is hidden from my eyes. (ESV)

Jonah 1:17
\[17] And the LORD appointed a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights. (ESV)

Luke 20:37–38
\[37] But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed, in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. \[38] Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to him.” (ESV)

John 2:19–22
\[19] Jesus answered them, “Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.” \[20] The Jews then said, “It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and will you raise it up in three days?” \[21] But he was speaking about the temple of his body. \[22] When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the word that Jesus had spoken. (ESV)

John 20:8–9
\[8] Then the other disciple, who had reached the tomb first, also went in, and he saw and believed; \[9] for as yet they did not understand the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead. (ESV)

This Scripture may be Ps. 16.

Acts 13:28–39
\[28] And though they found in him no guilt worthy of death, they asked Pilate to have him executed. \[29] And when they had carried out all that was written of him, they took him down from the tree and laid him in a tomb. \[30] But God raised him from the dead, \[31] and for many days he appeared to those who had come up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are now his witnesses to the people. \[32] And we bring you the good news that what God promised to the fathers, \[33] this he has fulfilled to us their children by raising Jesus, as also it is written in the second Psalm,
“‘You are my Son,
today I have begotten you.’


\[34] And as for the fact that he raised him from the dead, no more to return to corruption, he has spoken in this way,
“‘I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.’


\[35] Therefore he says also in another psalm,
“‘You will not let your Holy One see corruption.’


\[36] For David, after he had served the purpose of God in his own generation, fell asleep and was laid with his fathers and saw corruption, \[37] but he whom God raised up did not see corruption. \[38] Let it be known to you therefore, brothers, that through this man forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you, \[39] and by him everyone who believes is freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses. (ESV)

1 Corinthians 15:20
\[20] But in fact Christ has been raised from the dead, the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep. (ESV)