---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 5, 2026
title: HE HAS RISEN, AS HE SAID
occasion: Easter Sunday
readings:
  - Acts 10:34-43
  - Ps. 16
  - Col. 3:1-4
  - Matt. 28:1-10
sermon_text: Matt. 28:1-10
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE HAS RISEN, AS HE SAID

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!
> It was a strange and dreadful strife when Life and Death contended. The victory remained with Life, the reign of Death has ended.

For all the things we do out of our fear of death, belovèd in the Lord, hear this proclamation: Christ is risen and has conquered death for us. For all who believe and are baptized in Jesus' name, death is conquered, Alleluia!

There was a lot at stake when Jesus was crucified. What was at stake was whether or not everything He had said was true and whether or not everything He had done was real. But today we confess with all the witnesses of Christ's Resurrection that **HE HAS RISEN, AS HE SAID**. This is the Good News from the angel that rolled back the stone.

Christ's Resurrection is the culmination of His public ministry and the outcome of His Crucifixion. His public ministry had lasted three short years, *\[Baptism]*  beginning with His Baptism. The first trial He had after his Baptism was almost as serious as facing death itself — He was tempted for forty days by the devil, yet without sin (Matt. 4:1–11). There, in the wilderness — though tired, hungry, and thirsty — he rebuked the devil for having the wrong interpretation of the Bible. So, Jesus' claim of interpreting the Bible correctly against the devil was at stake at His Crucifixion.

When He started preaching, He said, **"Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is near"**  (Matt. 4:17). So, Jesus' claim that we should repent and stop sinning was also at stake at His Crucifixion.

Jesus went around Judea and Galilee healing the sick and demon-possessed. This was to fulfill what was spoken through the prophet Isaiah: **"He took up our infirmities and carried our diseases"**  (Matt. 8:17; Is. 53:4). So, not only was Jesus' power over sickness and Satan at stake, but what was also at stake at His crucifixion was whether or not he was the Christ foretold by the prophets.

Jesus taught.
> **Do not lay up for yourselves treasures on earth, where moth and rust destroy and where thieves break in and steal, but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust destroys and where thieves do not break in and steal. For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.**  (Matt. 6:19–21)

So, Jesus' teaching that we store up wealth in heaven and not on earth was at stake at His Crucifixion, as were many, many other teachings, like the warning that we not cause the little ones who believe in Him to sin (Matt. 18:6).

Jesus called the twelve apostles and sent them out.
> **Go nowhere among the Gentiles and enter no town of the Samaritans, but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And proclaim as you go, saying, "The kingdom of heaven is at hand." Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons. You received without paying; give without pay.**  (Matt. 10:5–8)

So, what was at stake at His Crucifixion was whether the apostles were God's called messengers or not.

Satan was clearly orchestrated Jesus' death, since it is written in Luke, chapter 22 that Satan entered Judas.
> **Then Satan entered into Judas called Iscariot, who was of the number of the twelve. He went away and conferred with the chief priests and officers how he might betray Him to them. And they were glad, and agreed to give him money. So he consented and sought an opportunity to betray Him to them in the absence of a crowd.**  (Luke 22:3–6)

So, what was at stake at Christ's Crucifixion was whether or not Satan had conquered the Christ.

Jesus had deeply offended the Pharisees, who were concerned with keeping the Ten Commandments, when he told them that their efforts were hypocritical.
> **Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitewashed tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead people's bones and all uncleanness. So you also outwardly appear righteous to others, but within you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.** (Matt. 23:27–28)

So, what was at stake at Jesus' Crucifixion was whether the Pharisees, who made a show of keeping the Commandments, were hypocrites or not.

Jesus said, **"The Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give His life as a ransom for many"**  (Matt. 20:28). A ransom is the price paid to purchase the freedom of a slave. So, whether or not Jesus really purchased our freedom from slavery to sin (John 8:34) was at stake at His Crucifixion. There is a lot at stake at Christ's Crucifixion.

Christ said,
> **For this reason the Father loves Me, because I lay down My life that I may take it up again. No one takes it from Me, but I lay it down of My own accord. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it up again. This charge I have received from My Father.**  (John 10:17–18)

Belovèd in the Lord, what was at stake at Christ's Crucifixion was also whether or not He had authority over death and that this authority had been given to Him by God the Father — whether He had the authority to lay down His life and the authority to take it up again. By His Resurrection from the dead — Alleluia! — He most certainly has demonstrated that authority *and* everything else He said or did falls into place. Alleluia! Jesus is Lord! Alleluia!

Belovèd in the Lord, **HE HAS RISEN, AS HE SAID**. And what about the thief on the cross who turned to Jesus and said, **"Jesus, remember me when You come into your kingdom"**  (Luke 23:42)? He's in paradise just as Christ is risen from the dead. And what about the woman who was a sinner who wet His feet with her tears, wiped His feet with her hair, and anointed them with ointment? It is as He said, just as He is risen from the dead:
> **Your sins are forgiven. … Your faith has saved you; go in peace.**  (Luke 7:48, 50)

And for those of us who have not had the opportunity to wet Christ's feet with our tears, He delivers His blood-bought forgiveness to us when He wets us with *\[font]*  His water — His washing which delivers a big promise to us, again, just as He is risen from the dead: **"We were therefore buried with Him** *\[font]*  **through Baptism in to death in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, we too may live a new life"**  (Rom. 6:4, NIV84). Christ's new life from the grave is our new life now, and just as he is risen from the dead, so will we rise on the Last Day. Alleluia! **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
I preached last year on Ps. 16.