---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: October 20, 2024
title: DON'T GIVE UP
occasion: 22nd Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Eccl. 5:10-20
  - Heb. 4:1-16
  - Mark 10:23-31
sermon_text: Mark 10:23-31
bible_version: ESV
---

# DON'T GIVE UP
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, heavenly Father, with your Spirit when we are tempted to give up. In he name of Jesus, Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Virginia has a friend named Marge who makes and sells pierogies. (I have your interest now, and some of you have heard this story before.) Back when I was learning to make pierogies, Virginia suggested to me that Marge could teach me and, by the grace of God, Marge *was* willing and *did* teach me how to make pierogies in her kitchen. I went to Marge's house off Denison and as she taught me how she does it—roll the dough, melt the margarine, stir in those onions. As she taught me she told me—as I was struggling to keep up with her as we made eight dozen together—she told me about the day she made *seventeen dozen* pierogies—all by herself, I believe, and I hope I got that number right—*seventeen dozen in a single day* … and wound up in the hospital with a shoulder injury. DON'T GIVE UP on the pierogies. Marge did not give up.

*DON'T GIVE UP.*  We've heard it before and we've said it before. *DON'T GIVE UP* probably means a lot to you and I bring it up because of today's Holy Gospel, where we hear our Lord Jesus say, **"All things are possible with God."**  DON'T GIVE UP because **all things are possible with God**.

For some things are difficult. Our Lord Jesus Himself tells us what's difficult in today's Holy Gospel:
> **Children, how difficult it is to enter the kingdom of God!**  ***It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle*** **than for a rich person to enter the kingdom of God.**

Remember that the rich young man from last week's Holy Gospel has just turned away from Jesus when our Lord has told him to sell all that he has and give to the poor—then he will have treasure in heaven. **"Sell all that you have and give to the poor …; and come, follow Me"**  (Mark 10:21). How difficult is this for the rich young man? **It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle.**  Difficult? Sounds impossible.

For some things *are* impossible. There's no way I'm ever going to walk eight miles. But, if I DON'T GIVE UP—if I just keep putting one foot in front of the other—I pass those mileposts along the towpath and—there!—I *did* walk eight miles.

But we Christians—making our steps in this world publicly as little Christs who follow Jesus—we Christians are *routinely* called to go the distance—we are constantly offended and are called to do the impossible. *Everyone in the world knows we are called to forgive those who trespass against us because we believe that Jesus won forgiveness for all sinners.*  They are watching because they know we have been called to do that which is impossible *for man*. It's so hard to forgive our enemies and do good to them that we pray about it all the time in the Lord's prayer. But forgive we do because we DON'T GIVE UP because **all things are possible with** ***Jesus***. Ah, yes, Jesus is God and He is our treasure by whom we have all things and can do all things.

For Jesus never … gives … up … on us. Belovèd in the Lord, *we have the Cross*. For in the verses following today's Holy Gospel in Mark, chapter 10 we hear,
> **\[The disciples] were on the road, going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was walking ahead of them. And they were amazed, and those who followed were afraid. And taking the twelve again, he began to tell them what was to happen to him, saying, "See, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered over to the chief priests and the scribes, and they will condemn him to death and deliver him over to the Gentiles. And they will mock him and spit on him, and flog him and kill him. And after three days he will rise."**  (Mark 10:32–34)

Belovèd in the Lord, in the middle of teaching His disciples about the kingdom of heaven and the difficult and the impossible, our Lord must point out His Cross which is, and always will be, *for us*. Satan had entered Judas and created such a delusion that all of Jesus' own disciples fled from Him. But the Son, though He couldn't count on us, could always count on His Father, and this He did on the Cross—sent to the Cross bearing our sins:
> **"Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!” And having said this He breathed His last.**  (Luke 23:46)

Had our Lord given up on the Cross *we would have nothing*. But He trusted His Father and did not give up; now we have *everything*. We just keep putting one foot in front of the other through faith in Jesus, and we have *everything*—forgiveness of our sins and anything else we could ever ask for. DON'T GIVE UP, for all things are *most certainly* possible with our Lord Jesus.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Sermon theme
DON'T GIVE UP: WE STILL HAVE JESUS AND MORE THAN WE EVER DREAMED OF.
## Outline
### I. Things just got harder.
#### A. Some things are difficult.
##### 1. It's difficult to ride a bike.
##### 2. It's difficult for a rich man to get into heaven.
Sounds impossible.
#### B. Other things are impossible.
##### 1. Walk eight miles.
##### 2. Forgive those who trespass against us.
#### C. But there comes point when we give up.
Satan wants us to give up. He wants us to give up and die.
##### 1. Take Job: he wanted to die.
##### 2. Take Elijah: he wanted to die.
##### 3. Take Jeremiah: he wanted to die
**"The Lord is near to the brokenhearted and saves the crushed in spirit"**  (Ps. 34:18).
### II. We always have Jesus.
#### A. He did die.
Mark 10:32–34
#### A. We have had Him since the foundation of world.
His sin offering was ordained before man was ever created.
#### B. He was given to us when we were baptized.
#### C. He is ours now.
##### 1. Where two or three are gathered.
##### 2. He feeds us even now with His body and blood.
##### 3. He lives in our hearts.
##### 4. He is and always has been our Good Shepherd.
He has never and will never turn His back on us.
#### D. We simply cannot say *impossible*.
## Introit
Psalm 34:1–4, 17; antiphon: v. 18

The Lord is near to the broken- | hearted\*
and saves the crushed in | spirit.
I will bless the Lord at | all times;\*
his praise shall continually be | in my mouth.
My soul makes its boast | in the Lord;\*
let the humble hear | and be glad.
Oh, magnify the | Lord with me,\*
and let us exalt his name to- | gether!
I sought the Lord, and he | answered me\*
and delivered me from | all my fears.
When the righteous cry for help, the | Lord hears\*
and delivers them out of all their | troubles.
**Glory be to the Father and | to the Son**\*
**and to the Holy | Spirit;**
**as it was in the be- | ginning,**  \*
**is now, and will be forever. | Amen.**
The Lord is near to the broken- | hearted\*
and saves the crushed in | spirit.
## Collect
O God, Your divine wisdom sets in order all things in heaven and on earth. **Put away from us all things hurtful and give us those things that are beneficial for us**; through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.
## Psalm
Psalm 119:9–16; antiphon: v. 14

9 How can a young man keep his | way pure?\*
By guarding it according | to your word.
10 With my whole heart I | seek you;\*
let me not wander from your com- | mandments!
11 I have stored up your word | in my heart,\*
that I might not sin a- | gainst you.
12 Blessèd are you, | O Lord;\*
teach me your | statutes!
13 With my lips | I declare\*
all the just decrees | of your mouth.
14 In the way of your testimonies | I delight\*
as much as in all | riches.
15 I will meditate on your | precepts\*
and fix my eyes | on your ways.
16 I will delight in your | statutes;\*
I will not for- | get your word.
## Verse
Mark 10:27b

Alleluia. With man it is impossible, but not with God. For all things are possible with God. Alleluia.
## Notes
Ecclesiastes 3:11–13
\[11] He has made everything beautiful in its time. Also, he has put eternity into man’s heart, yet so that he cannot find out what God has done from the beginning to the end. \[12] I perceived that there is nothing better for them than to be joyful and to do good as long as they live; \[13] also that everyone should eat and drink and take pleasure in all his toil—this is God’s gift to man. (ESV)

Ecclesiastes 5:18
\[18] Behold, what I have seen to be good and fitting is to eat and drink and find enjoyment in all the toil with which one toils under the sun the few days of his life that God has given him, for this is his lot. (ESV)

Mark 9:23
\[23] And Jesus said to him, “‘If you can’! All things are possible for one who believes.” (ESV)

Hebrews 4:9–10
\[9] So then, there remains a Sabbath rest for the people of God, \[10] for whoever has entered God’s rest has also rested from his works as God did from his. (ESV)

Hebrews 4:12–13
\[12] For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints and of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart. \[13] And no creature is hidden from his sight, but all are naked and exposed to the eyes of him to whom we must give account. (ESV)

Hebrews 4:15
\[15] For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin. (ESV)

Hebrews 5:8–10
\[8] Although he was a son, he learned obedience through what he suffered. \[9] And being made perfect, he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him, \[10] being designated by God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek. (ESV)

Holy Gospel:

|            |          |
| ---------- | -------- |
| difficult  | easy     |
| impossible | possible |


1 Peter 1:18–20
\[18] knowing that you were ransomed from the futile ways inherited from your forefathers, not with perishable things such as silver or gold, \[19] but with the precious blood of Christ, like that of a lamb without blemish or spot. \[20] He was foreknown before the foundation of the world but was made manifest in the last times for the sake of you (ESV)

Revelation 13:8
\[8] and all who dwell on earth will worship it, everyone whose name has not been written before the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who was slain. (ESV)

Riding a two-wheeler, for example: that's difficult. *\[Ask]*  Do you remember when you learned to ride a bike? That was a major moment in my life and I suspect you also remember that time when you learned how to ride a bike. You know, I never had training wheels—but my mom was holding on to the back seat the whole time. I was wobbly so she held on to the back of my seat and ran as I picked up speed, up and down the sidewalk. Finally the moment came when I had picked up enough speed and she let go, and after enough practice … *Woohoo!*  *I'm riding my bike!*  Thanks, Mom, for teaching me to ride a bike and letting go at the right time.
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |