---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 9, 2025
title: HE IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING
occasion: 22nd Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Ex. 3:1-15
  - 2 Thess. 2:1-8, 13-17
  - Luke 20:27-40
sermon_text: Luke 20:27-40
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank and praise you, heavenly Father, that You are the God of the living. In the name of Your Son Jesus, Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Moses was drawn out the water — that's what his name means. He was saved from Pharaoh's slaughter to be raised by Pharaoh's daughter (Ex. 2:10) — with Moses we can never doubt what the Lord can work from a bad situation. Moses grew up in Pharaoh's house, but he must have been told that he was taken from the Hebrews, who were Pharaoh's slaves. Because one day he saw an Egyptian beating a Hebrew, and Moses **struck down the Egyptian and hid him in the sand** (Ex. 2:12). For this Pharaoh **sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from Pharaoh and stayed in the land of Midian** (Ex. 2:15). That's how we get to the art on the bulletin cover: *\[bulletin]*  here we see Moses at the burning bush, which is today's Old Testament lesson.
> **The angel of the LORD appeared to \[Moses] in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. He looked, and behold,**  ***the bush was burning*, yet it was not consumed. … When the LORD saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him out of the bush, "Moses, Moses!" And he said, "Here I am." Then He said, "Do not come near; take your sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground."**  (Ex. 3:2, 4–5)

At the burning bush we have Moses in the presence of God — on holy ground.
> **And \[the LORD] said, "I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God.**  (Ex. 3:6)

This is a natural reaction for any sinner in the presence of God's holiness. Yet God has called him there. And it is this statement from the LORD at the burning bush, **"I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob"**  — it is this statement that our Lord Jesus brings up today in our Holy Gospel while He argues with the Sadducees. **"I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob."**  What does this mean? Our Lord Jesus will tell us soon enough.

But before He does, let us tip our hats to the burning bush and take note how often the Bible points to the burning bush. At the burning bush Moses asked God His name and God told him: *I AM*; in Hebrew, Yahweh. I AM is God's name told to Moses at the burning bush. And we cannot help but notice, when we read John's Gospel in the New Testament, how often Jesus calls Himself by this name, *I AM* (John 8:58; 18:5–6). *\[Crucifixion]*  He was crucified because He stated plainly that He is God. This is the right time to bring it up because Christmas is around the corner and the reason for the season, let us never forget — the reason to celebrate Christmas is to celebrate that God chose to be born as a man to save us. Jesus is I AM, and it points to the burning bush.

*\[Transition]*  But now to our Holy Gospel, where our Lord Jesus again points to the burning bush. **"There came to \[Jesus] some Sadducees, those who** ***deny that there is a resurrection*."**  Basic fact: the Sadducees are famous for denying that the dead are resurrected. But there are other Jews, the Pharisees, who believe that the dead *are* resurrected. St. Paul will use this dispute between the Pharisees and Sadducees to his advantage when he is put on trial in the book of Acts (Acts 23:6). The Sadducees, who deny the resurrection of the dead, think they know to catch Jesus: catch Him in a riddle.

**"Teacher, Moses wrote for us that if a man's brother dies, having a wife but no children, the man must take the widow and raise up offspring for his brother."**  This is in the Bible (Deut. 25:5).
> **Now there were seven brothers. The first took a wife, and died without children. And the second and the third took her, and likewise all seven left no children and died. Afterward the woman also died.**  ***In the resurrection*, therefore, whose wife will the woman be? For the seven had her as wife.**

That's the riddle. "Show us, Jesus, how smart your are." Taking that approach with Jesus, you will likely find out something wonderful, but you won't look too smart yourself.

**"And Jesus said to them, 'The sons of this age marry and are given in marriage, but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and to the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage.' "**  Here is the best answer we have to the question, "Will I be with my wife in heaven?" or "Will I be with my husband in heaven?" The answer is, "Yes, you will be with your believing husband, with your believing wife — you will be with every believer in Christ. But you will *not* be married in heaven like you were on earth." I know this is a disappointment to many. Our Lord continues, **"For they cannot die anymore, because they are equal to angels and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection."**  Not only are believers in Jesus raised from the dead with brand new bodies, but here our Lord tells us that at the resurrection we are to be **equal to angels**. That is sure interesting, and what it will be like will be wonderful, but there it is — can't deny it cuz God says it — at the resurrection we will be **equal to angels**.

But now I want to get to the heart of the sermon, because our Lord has said, **"They cannot die anymore."**  We can sure die now, but at the resurrection that will no longer even be possible — it will be impossible to die at the resurrection of the dead. And, by the way, I imagine that the Sadducees are shaking their heads as Jesus is saying all of this. Jesus says it and we believe it, but the Sadducees do not — they deny it all. (This is why it is not far off to say, "Sad, you see.")

Now what about death? Death is all around us — our sister Judy tasted death yesterday — and our day is coming, too. Some will say, "Death is natural." But God says, "No it is not! I did not create death. I AM NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE *LIVING*." Our Lord is getting to the point:
> **But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed, in the passage about the bush, where he calls the Lord the God of Abraham and the God of Isaac and the God of Jacob. Now HE IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING, for all live to Him.**

With these Words from the burning bush, **"I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,"**  Jesus is saying, "Abraham died, Isaac died, Jacob died. But do you think they're dead? No, they are not!"

We know the wages of sin is death (Rom. 6:23a) — we've heard it many times. But God did not make death, and He did not make sin. Did Jacob sin? He lied to his father, Isaac (Gen. 27:19). Did Isaac sin? Isaac lied about his wife, Rebekah, and said she was his sister (Gen. 26:7). Did Abraham sin? Abraham lied about Sarah, too — twice (Gen. 12:13; 20:2)! Though the Bible speaks well of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they were all sinners and they died and were buried. **"Just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because** ***all sinned*"**  (Rom. 5:12). We see it all around us and our day is coming, too.

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, God gives us a clear testimony in His Word that HE IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING. We hear in Psalm 6, **"In death there is no remembrance of you; in Sheol who will give you praise?"**  (Ps. 6:5) If we are to remember God, we cannot be dead: we must be alive. We hear in Psalm 30,
> **What profit is there in my death, if I go down to the pit? Will the dust praise you? Will it tell of your faithfulness?**  (Ps. 30:9)

And, again, we hear in Psalm 88,
> **Do you work wonders for the dead? Do the departed rise up to praise you? Is your steadfast love declared in the grave, or your faithfulness in Abaddon? Are your wonders known in the darkness, or your righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?**  (Ps. 88:10–12)

Is God the God of the dead? No! HE IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING — we cannot praise Him unless we are alive — how can we possibly worship God if we are dead? And God does not tire of saying it. You sad Sadducees have no clue — you who deny the resurrection of the dead.

*\[Conclusion]*  And so, belovèd in the Lord, with this age drawing to a close while we keep our lamps lit, waiting for our Bridegroom to return (Matt. 25:10). With Jesus we can never doubt that our Lord works life from death. *\[Crucifixion]*  His Cross; now behold: *\[Resurrection]*  His Resurrection. Where Christ's Cross is believed for the forgiveness of sin, there is, and always will be, the resurrection of the dead and eternal life. GOD IS NOT THE GOD OF THE DEAD, BUT OF THE LIVING. Satan will do all that he can to deny it, but who can ever deny that our Lord was resurrected from the dead for us? No one. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
And do you happen to remember where this burning bush was? On Sinai — on the same mountain to which Moses would return with the nation of Israel to receive God Commandments.