---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 15, 2024
title: BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHO IS NOT OFFENDED BY ME
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - Zeph. 3:14-20
  - Phil. 4:4-7
  - Luke 7:18-35
sermon_text: Luke 7:18-35
bible_version: ESV
---

# BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHO IS NOT OFFENDED BY ME

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Lord Jesus, to ever believe in You and not be offended. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, the promised Messiah comes and there are those who are offended. Being offended is huge these days; just about everyone is offended. If we got together to publish a book entitled *The Encyclopedia of Offenses* we would not have a book on our hands: we'd have a multi-volume set. I bet, if we marketed the set of encyclopedias well, we could sell it door-to-door and make good money. In fact, I know exactly how to do it: publish two or three different sets; sell one set to people who are offended one way and another set to people who are offended another way. We'd make money. Today, however, our focus is on only *one kind* of offense: being offended by Jesus.

For Jesus comes and there are those who are offended by Him. As our sermon text is the Holy Gospel, let us look there; let us take our clues from the Gospel. **"\[John the Baptist], calling two of his disciples to him, sent them to the Lord, saying, 'Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?' "**  We have John the Baptist right off the bat—Elijah preparing the way for the Lord—we have John committing a huge offense himself, namely, pointing out Herod's adultery with Herodias. Herod and Herodias have no business being married, and John graciously points it out according to God's Commandment, which we all know, the Sixth Commandment: **"You shall not commit adultery."**  *\[Understatement]*  Is there offense taken? Behold, the head of John … on a platter (Matt. 14:11).

When offense is taken and retaliation comes at such a scale of gruesomeness, how can we say there is no devil? There *is* a devil, and he will murder again today (John 8:44a). Scripture says, **"Woe to you, O earth and sea, for the devil has come down to you in great wrath, because he knows that his time is short!"**  (Rev. 12:12) It is also written,
> **Your adversary the devil prowls around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour. Resist him, firm in your faith, knowing that the same kinds of suffering are being experienced by your brotherhood throughout the world.**  (1 Pet. 5:8b–9)

The devil is offended by Jesus.

*\[Transition]*  Now we return to the Holy Gospel where John the Baptist still lives and he has sent his disciples to Jesus.
> **"John the Baptist has sent us to you, \[Jesus,] saying, 'Are you the one who is to come, or shall we look for another?' " In that hour \[our Lord] healed many people of diseases and plagues** ***and evil spirits*, and on many who were blind he bestowed sight.**  (Luke 7:20b–21)

Still keeping our attention on our adversary the devil, we hear that in that hour our Lord healed many of evil spirits—presumably the fallen angels who were thrown out of heaven with the devil. Our Lord heals us of our diseases but let us rejoice especially that He has the authority to cast out demons!

Now what about the offense? There is a casting out of demons for us to take to heart this morning of offenses. Our Holy Gospel comes to us from Luke, chapter 7; we have a casting out of demons in Luke, chapter 8:
> **\[The disciples] sailed to the country of the Gerasenes, which is opposite Galilee. When Jesus had stepped out on land, there met him a man from the city who had demons. For a long time he had worn no clothes, and he had not lived in a house but among the tombs. When he saw Jesus, he cried out and fell down before him and said with a loud voice, "What have you to do with me, Jesus, Son of the Most High God? I beg you, do not torment me." For \[Jesus] had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man.**  (Luke 8:26–29a)

Remember this man? Our Lord Jesus casts out the demons and the pigs have drowned.
> **When the herdsmen saw what had happened, they fled and told it in the city and in the country. Then people went out to see what had happened, and they came to Jesus and found the man from whom the demons had gone, sitting at the feet of Jesus,** ***clothed and in his right mind*.**  (Luke 8:34–35a)

Seeing the formerly demon-possessed man clothed and in his right mind is cause for celebration, I'd say, but we are told that the people were afraid (Luke 8:35b). Here is where Jesus offends and here is where we hear Him say, **"BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHO IS** ***NOT*** **OFFENDED BY ME."**  Blessèd are we who believe in Jesus, but not the Gerasenes. **"Then all the people of the surrounding country of the Gerasenes asked \[Jesus] to** ***depart from them*, for they were seized with great fear"** (Luke 8:37a).

Belovèd in the Lord, our Lord Jesus comes to destroy the works of the devil (1 John 3:8b). He comes to destroy the devil's works not from afar, but by sharing our flesh and blood:

**"Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery"**  (Heb. 2:14–15). And take to heart that He says, **"BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHO IS NOT OFFENDED BY ME."**

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Zephaniah preached during the reign of Josiah.

Luke 6:22–23
\[22] “Blessed are you when people hate you and when they exclude you and revile you and spurn your name as evil, on account of the Son of Man! \[23] Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven; for so their fathers did to the prophets. (ESV)