---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 14, 2025
title: THE JOY OF JOHN
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - Is. 35
  - Ps. 146
  - James 5:7-11
  - Matt. 11:2-15
sermon_text: Ps. 146
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE JOY OF JOHN

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, we rejoice only in that Your good and gracious will is done through Jesus Christ, Your Son, our Lord. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, John the Baptist prepares the way of the Lord. Today, for the Third Sunday in Advent, we have *joy*, which is the traditional theme for this particular Sunday - *\[Advent wreath]*  the pink candle is lit for joy. Today we will consider THE JOY OF JOHN the Baptist, the Elijah foretold by Malachi (Mal. 4:5; Matt. 11:14) to prepare the way of the Lord.

At the mention of the name Elijah, what do you remember about the joy of Elijah? Was he popping bubble gum and giving the thumbs-up while serving as the prophet the Lord called him to be? Elijah’s joy is something to consider as we consider THE JOY OF JOHN the Baptist.

Though many prophets foretold the coming of the Messiah, there are two who foretold the coming of John the Baptist: Malachi and Isaiah. Isaiah proclaimed,

A voice cries: “In the wilderness prepare the way of the LORD; make straight in the desert a highway for our God. Every valley shall be lifted up, and every mountain and hill be made low; the uneven ground shall become level, and the rough places a plain. And the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together, for the mouth of the LORD has spoken. (Is. 40:3-5)

This is the prophecy of Isaiah concerning John the Baptist. Now here is what we are told in Matthew’s Gospel about John when he appeared.

\[4] Now John wore a garment of camel’s hair and a leather belt around his waist, and his food was locusts and wild honey.
\[5] Then Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region about the Jordan were going out to him,
\[6] and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
Matthew 3:4Matthew 3:5Matthew 3:6

Out in the wilderness John preached God’s Law and judgment against all who sinned against it - that’s everyone (Eccl. 7:20). Not only did John preach repentance but **“*Bear fruit*** **in keeping with repentance”** (Matt. 3:8) - turn away from sin already!

I imagine that preaching repentance for John was about as fun as it was for Elijah to preach to Jezebel to give up on Baal. I do not believe that John’s joy came from the appreciation shown to him by his hearers.

However, by the clear teaching of or Lord Jesus Christ about repentance we know this: **“I tell you, there is joy before the angels of God over one sinner who repents”** (Luke 15:10). That’s for sure. Any joy that might be lacking on earth is not lacking in heaven at the preaching of John the Baptist - God’s good and gracious will is done.

How is God’s will done? God will is done when He breaks and hinders every evil plan and purpose of the devil, the world, and our sinful nature, which do not want us to hallow God’s name or lett his kingdom come; and when He strengthens and keeps us firm in His Word and faith until we die. This is His good and gracious will.

We can be sure that God’s good and gracious will is bring done through John; this is cause for joy. But what is the cause of John’s joy. What gives him the disposition to pray our psalm?

Praise the LORD!
Praise the LORD, O my soul!
I will praise the LORD as long as I live; I will sing praises to my God while I have my being.

This we may come to see from the testimony of John concerning Christ. When Christ comes to be baptized by John in the Jordan, what does John say? **“I need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?”** (Matt. 3:14b) Christ is sinless. **“He who comes after me ranks before me, because He was before me”** (John 1:15). Christ is God. Christ’s presence brings heavenly reality.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Isaiah 35:8
\[8] And a highway shall be there,
and it shall be called the Way of Holiness;
the unclean shall not pass over it.
It shall belong to those who walk on the way;
even if they are fools, they shall not go astray.

Matthew 11:12-15
\[12] From the days of John the Baptist until now the kingdom of heaven has suffered violence, and the violent take it by force. \[13] For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John, \[14] and if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come. \[15] He who has ears to hear, let him hear.