---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 23, 2025
title: THE LORD IS PATIENT, THAT ALL SHOULD REACH REPENTANCE.
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Ezek. 33:7-20
  - 1 Cor. 10:1-3
  - Luke 13:1-9
sermon_text: Luke 13:1-9
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE LORD IS PATIENT, THAT ALL SHOULD REACH REPENTANCE.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Holy Spirit, with repentance unto faith in Jesus, that our joy may be full. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, the color for Lent is purple. And someone on the church calendar committee came up with purple standing for repentance. Purple is the color of repentance and it has been chosen to be the liturgical color for Lent, as you can see. It may be God's favorite color, for **there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner** ***who repents*** **than over ninety-nine righteous persons who need no repentance** (Luke 15:7). Our Lord tells us that all of heaven is very, very happy over our repentance.

Repentance is something that we often hear and often think about. First, the Greek Word for *repentance* in the New Testament simply means *change your mind*. "Did you change your mind about your sin?"

"Yes, I sure did. I was wrong and I don't want to"—for the sake of example—"I don't want to gossip anymore." For we have the Eighth Commandment:
> **You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor.**  *What does this mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not tell lies about our neighbor, betray him, slander him, or hurt his reputation, but defend him, speak well of him, and explain everything in the kindest way.

"I sinned against the Eighth Commandment and I won't gossip anymore" triggers that joy in heaven, and that's what repentance is: changing our mind about sin. What a precious thing it is that one sinner's repentance triggers an automatic celebration in heaven.

*\[Illustration]*  Here on earth, the birth of a child automatically triggers a celebration for parents who want the child. It's a deep and profound joy—it certainly has been for Trina and me, and I thank God for our joy and the joy endures to this day—it even grows. It is reasonable to say that the joy in heaven over one sinner who repents is similar to parents who rejoice over the birth of their child.

In fact, the Bible does have the expression *born from above*. Have you heard it? **"Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is** ***born*** ***from above*** **he cannot see the kingdom of God"**  (John 3:3b). Some say, "That's not right. It's ***born*** ***again***." Since I've brought out the Greek already I might as well bring it out one more time. The Greek word for *again* can also mean *from above*—it's just how Greek works. *Born again* and *born from above* are exactly the same words in Greek. So, we have, still in John, chapter 3,
> **Do not marvel that I said to you, "You must be** ***born from above*." The wind blows where it wishes, and you hear its sound, but you do not know where it comes from or where it goes. So it is with everyone who is** ***born of the Spirit*.**  (John 3:7–8)

Our Lord Jesus speaks says *born of the Spirit* and *born from above* in the same breath—in other words, a heavenly birth. To be *born from above* means to be born in heaven. One sinner who repents has literally been born in heaven and the angels rejoice!

*\[Transition]*  Although heaven is very, very happy over our repentance, we all to often think of repentance in an earthly way. Here's what I mean: "What I'm concerned about is *his* repentance, not mine." We are constantly on the lookout for *others* to repent—those who have sinned against someone else and especially those who have sinned against us. If there were a pie chart for that slice of our time taken up with concern about how *others* should repent—not how *I* should repent, but how *he* should repent—I believe we would see much more than a sliver. We're quick to think about what *others* need to repent of. This alone, concern for *others* to repent, for *others* to take the blame, is a big mess. It has consumed our thoughts since the Fall. In fact, listen to Adam right after he ate the forbidden fruit talking to God: **"**  ***The woman*** **whom you gave to be with me,**  ***she*** **gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate"**  (Gen. 3:12b). Yes, Adam, but what do *you* need to repent of?

We are blessed this morning to hear our Lord Jesus speak in the Holy Gospel for a much-needed correction:
> **There were some present at that very time who told \[Jesus] about the Galileans whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. And he answered them, "Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered in this way? No, I tell you; but unless you repent, you will all likewise perish."**  (Luke 13:1–3)

We see misfortune befall someone else and we see God's hand in it and we say, "See, if he would have repented he wouldn't have gotten sick—if he would have repented his wife wouldn't have left him." Jesus warns us, "You're no better than they are. **Unless** ***you*** **repent, you will all likewise perish**."

In our Old Testament lesson God underlines the danger to us who refuse to repent and the imminent blessing to all of us who do.
> **Say to them, As I live, declares the Lord GOD, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked,**  ***but that the wicked turn from his way*** ***and live*; turn back, turn back from your evil ways, for why will you die, O house of Israel? … Though I say to the righteous that he shall surely live, yet if he trusts in his righteousness and does injustice, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered, but in his injustice that he has done he shall die.**

Beware! Unrepentance is instant death.
> **Again, though I say to the wicked, "You shall surely die," yet if he turns from his sin and does what is just and right, if the wicked restores the pledge, gives back what he has taken by robbery, and walks in the statutes of life, not doing injustice, he shall surely live; he shall not die. None of the sins that he has committed shall be remembered against him. He has done what is just and right;**  ***he shall surely live*.**  (Ezek. 33:11, 13–16)


**"He shall surely live!"**  the angels rejoice. **"He shall surely live!"**  God said it. I believe it. That settles it. Belovèd in the Lord, *we* shall surely live in the name of Jesus! For us to surely live in the name of Jesus is to turn from our sin and *\[Crucifixion]*  behold His Cross, where our sin is fully forgiven.

One question that may bother us is "Have I repented well enough?" Turn to Luke, chapter 23 and behold the thief who turns to our crucified Lord and says simply, **"Jesus, remember me when You come into your kingdom"**  (Luke 23:42). Turn to 2 Samuel, chapter 12 and hear how the poor, miserable sinner King David repents: **"I have sinned against the LORD"**  is his simple confession to Nathan, no more, no less. **And Nathan \[says] to David, "The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die"**  (2 Sam. 12:13). And our Lord says to the thief, **"Truly, I say to you, today you will be with Me in Paradise"**  (Luke 23:43).

Belovèd in the Lord, our confessions are simple and they only be made to God. And for the sake of His Son whose blood has released us from our sins, our merciful Father in heaven has put away or sin. There is no doubt: we shall not die; we shall live. Alleluia! For turning away from sin is one thing, and to have God handle that burden for us is His job, not ours. But He has done it (Ps. 22:31b). He has done a wonderful thing for us in putting away our sin by the sacrifice of His Son, Jesus. Our joy is deep, and it will only grow.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes