---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 8, 2026
title: TODAY, IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS.
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Ex. 17:1-7
  - Ps. 95
  - Rom. 5:1-8
  - Heb. 3:7-19
  - John 4:5-26
sermon_text: Ps. 95
bible_version: ESV
---

# TODAY, IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank and praise you, gracious Father, for the hearts of flesh you have given us in the name of Your Son, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, honoring the tradition of naming the Psalms by their first line, today's psalm is **"Oh come, let us sing to the LORD; let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation!"**  This is a psalm of praise to Jesus Christ, our God our Savior (Titus 2:13). Yet toward the end of the psalm we are warned, **"TODAY, IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS,"**  and at the very end of the psalm God pronounces His wrath and judgment, **"Therefore I swore in my wrath, 'They shall not enter my rest.' "**  These are words we never want to hear.

I will pick up on a pattern of teaching from this psalm that we do well to recognize as a danger to our souls: **"TODAY, IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE,** ***DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS*."**  The hardening of the heart is a steady descent into unbelief that can only bring terrible consequences — and God forbid! — it is possible to lose our faith and our salvation if Satan deceives us so that our hearts are hardened against Christ. If we are lost, however, it cannot be God's fault, for He is faithful, as it is written in 2 Timothy, chapter 2,
> **The saying is trustworthy, for: If we have died with \[Christ], we will also live with Him; if we endure, we will also reign with Him;** ***if we deny Him, He also will deny us*; if we are faithless, He remains faith*ful*** **— for He cannot deny Himself.**  (2 Tim. 2:11–13)

The hardening of the heart is that satanic process by which it is possible that we deny God so that He denies us, and we are lost — our love has grown cold (Matt. 24:12). But God is never at fault, for **He remains faithful** — it is only we, who, with hard hearts, can be faithless.

Belovèd in the Lord, the only way we want to be is faith*ful*, of course — the only way we want to be is *not* to harden our hearts against God, and by the grace of the Spirit, we will not — by the grace of the Spirit we will maintain our hearts of flesh which *\[font]*  were given to us with our Baptism into Christ, as Ezekiel prophesied:
> **I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you. And I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you. And I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes and be careful to obey my rules.**  (Ezek. 36:25–27)

For our God-given hearts of flesh to be safe, it is better to heed the warning from our psalm about the hardening of the heart. The prototype for the hardening of the heart is Pharaoh in the Old Testament, who hardened his heart against God every time God spoke and took action through His servant Moses. Pharaoh hardened his heart (Ex. 9:34–35), and he and his army were destroyed.

But — wouldn't you know? — the hardening of the heart brought up by today's psalm happens *not* to be the hardening of Pharaoh's heart but the hardening of *the Israelites' hearts* — those same Israelites that God had saved from Pharaoh's army. We hear in the psalm, **"TODAY, IF YOU HEAR HIS VOICE, DO NOT HARDEN YOUR HEARTS, as at Meribah, as on the day at Massah in the wilderness, when your fathers put Me to the test and put Me to the proof, though they had seen My work."**  The Israelites had seen God's work — the Israelites had seen God's salvation from slavery in Egypt and from Pharaoh's army, being *\[font]*  saved by water, passing on dry ground through the Red Sea. Yet these very Israelites nevertheless hardened their hearts against God their Savior at Massah and Meribah. And this account of Massah and Meribah is given us today in our Old Testament lesson, from Exodus, chapter 17.

But before we get to our Old Testament lesson, let us go over what happened after God had drowned Pharaoh's army in the Red Sea.
> **Then Moses made Israel set out from the Red Sea, and they went into the wilderness of Shur. They went three days in the wilderness and** ***found no water*. When they came to Marah, they could not drink the water of Marah because it was bitter; therefore it was named Marah. And the people grumbled against Moses, saying, "What shall we drink?" And he cried to the LORD, and the LORD showed him a log, and \[Moses] threw it into the water, and the water became sweet.**  (Ex. 15:22–25a)

We take note that the first problem after the parting of the Red Sea was thirst, and the Lord gave His chosen people fresh water to drink at Marah. **"Then they came to Elim, where there were twelve springs of water and seventy palm trees, and they encamped there by the water"**  (Ex. 15:27) — in other words, there was enough water for the Israelites. They might have been thirsty, but they nevertheless always had enough to drink.

They had enough to drink, yes, but what about food? Next, the Israelites set out from Elim and came to the wilderness of Sin, where — guess what? — they grumbled once more against Moses and Aaron, **"Would that we had died by the hand of the LORD in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the meat pots and ate bread to the full, for you have brought us out into this wilderness to kill this whole assembly with hunger"**  (Ex. 16:3). We take note that this grumbling against Moses and Aaron was the symptom of the hardening of the hearts of Israel.

*\[Ask]*  Well, belovèd in the Lord, do you remember what happened in the wilderness of Sin? God rained quail and manna from heaven (Ex. 16:13–15) for the Israelites to eat, again proving that He is faithful!

Now we have arrived at Massah and Meribah.
> **All the congregation of the people of Israel moved on from the wilderness of Sin by stages, according to the commandment of the LORD, and camped at Rephidim, but there was no water for the people to drink. Therefore the people quarreled with Moses and said, "Give us water to drink." And Moses said to them, "Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you test the LORD?"**  (Ex. 17:1–2)

And finally, God brought water out of the rock for the Israelites to drink. The Lord said to Moses,
> **"Behold, I will stand before you there on the rock at Horeb, and you shall strike the rock, and water shall come out of it, and the people will drink." And Moses did so, in the sight of the elders of Israel. And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the quarreling of the people of Israel, and because they tested the LORD by saying, "Is the LORD among us or not?"**  (Ex. 17:6–7)

This is how the hardening of the Israelites' hearts played out. God had been faithful yet they did not stop complaining and their hearts were hardened. *\[Pray]*  Help us, Holy Spirit, that our hearts are never hardened against our Lord Jesus!

*\[Transition]* Now, belovèd in the Lord, take note that in today's Holy Gospel the Samaritan woman did not harden her heart when she heard the Lord's voice.
> **The Samaritan woman said to \[Jesus], "How is it that you, a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a woman of Samaria?" (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.) Jesus answered her, "If you knew the gift of God, and who it is that is saying to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked Him, and He would have given you living water." The woman said to Him, "Sir, you have nothing to draw water with, and the well is deep. Where do you get that living water? Are you greater than our father Jacob? He gave us the well and drank from it himself, as did his sons and his livestock."**  (John 4:9–12)

By the end of their conversation, the Samaritan woman, whose name we do not know, has come to believe that not only is Jesus greater than Jacob, but He is the Messiah, whom God has promised to save us from our sins. Scripture would suggest that the Samaritan woman not only listens to Jesus and believes that He was the Messiah, but is also was careful to obey God's rules about marriage.

But for us it is enough for us to see that the Samaritan woman is safe — she does not harden her heart as she listens to Jesus' voice and believes Him and is saved. **"Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever hears My word and believes Him who sent Me has eternal life. He does not come into judgment, but has passed from death to life"**  (John 5:24). **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Ephesians 4:17–19
\[17] Now this I say and testify in the Lord, that you must no longer walk as the Gentiles do, in the futility of their minds. \[18] They are darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God because of the ignorance that is in them, due to their hardness of heart. \[19] They have become callous and have given themselves up to sensuality, greedy to practice every kind of impurity. (ESV)

Ephesians 4:30
\[30] And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, by whom you were sealed for the day of redemption. (ESV)