---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 1, 2024
title: WE WISH TO SERVE THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH OF DAVID
occasion: 1st Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - Jer. 33:14-16
  - 1 Thess. 3:9-13
  - Luke 19:28-40
sermon_text: Luke 19:28-40
bible_version: ESV
---

# WE WISH TO SERVE THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH OF DAVID

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, grant us Your Spirit that our hopes be always set on Your Son, the Messiah Jesus, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have started the new church year: the season of Advent—the four Sundays before Christmas. *\[Irony]*  What are we so excited about? We do this every year. We ponder now, as we do every year, that the promised Messiah was long-awaited for thousands of years before He was ever born. And now, after His birth, death, and Resurrection, it's still exciting to consider *that He ever came* as God had promised He would come. His coming the first time will ever raise our hopes although He has already come. So we light a candle and turn our eyes to heaven, from where our help comes. **"Our help is in the name of the LORD, who made heaven and earth"**  (Ps. 124:8).

Today we put ourselves in the shoes of the Old Testament believers who shuddered at the idolatry going on all around them in faithless Judah, six hundred years before Christ. God had already removed the northern kingdom of Israel out of His sight and has settled Israel's territory with Assyrians. But the southern kingdom of Judah, though it still exists, is still mired in idolatry. The LORD raised up the prophet Jeremiah to rebuke idolatry and then to proclaim the Messiah that is to come.

During this time, Manasseh, King of Judah, was an awful king: he burned his son as an offering. He also consulted with fortune-tellers, mediums, and necromancers—those who speak with the spirits of the dead. **\[Manasseh] did much evil in the sight of the LORD, provoking Him to anger** (2 Ki. 21:6).

Manasseh had a grandon, though. Manasseh's grandson Josiah turned out to be a righteous king—how refreshing! *\[Ask]*  Do you remember what King Josiah did? During the reign of Josiah, Hilkiah the high priest found the scroll of the Law of Moses, of all things—Hilkiah found the scroll of the Law of Moses in the temple! Hilkiah then gave the scroll to Shaphan, King Josiah's secretary, and Shaphan read it to King Josiah (2 Ki. 22:8–10). What did the king do? Josiah was a wonderful king compared to Manasseh, for when he heard God's Law, he repented for himself and for the nation which he ruled, and then King Josiah led Judah in repentance of idolatry and he led them in hearing and doing God's Law. A noteworthy act of Josiah is that **he defiled Topheth, which is in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom,** \[next to Jerusalem,]  **that no one might burn his son or his daughter as an offering to Molech** (2 Kings 23:10), the idol of the Ammonites, anymomre.

Josiah was a wonderful king, but nevertheless the LORD's Word concerning Judah was foreboding:
> **Before \[Josiah] there was no king like him, who turned to the LORD with all his heart and with all his soul and with all his might, according to all the Law of Moses, nor did any like him arise after him. Still the LORD did** ***not*** **turn from the burning of his great wrath, by which his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations with which** ***Manasseh*** **had provoked him.**

The idolatry of Manasseh was so bad that Josiah couldn't fix it—Josiah's reforms did not *propitiate* God's anger—God was still angry with Judah.
> **And the LORD said, "I will remove Judah also out of my sight, as I have removed Israel, and I will cast off this city that I have chosen, Jerusalem, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there."**  (2 Ki. 23:25–27)

Josiah was what we would want any king to be. And though he was great, he was *not great enough*. Judah needed a King to do *better than the king who did everything right*. Judah needed *the Messiah*, and Josiah, as good as he was, was not the Messiah. To proclaim the coming Messiah God raised up the prophet Jeremiah, who prophesied during and after the reign of Josiah. Jeremiah proclaimed,
> **Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will raise up for David** ***a righteous Branch*, and he shall reign as king and deal wisely, and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land. In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will dwell securely. And this is the name by which he will be called: "The LORD is our righteousness."**  (Jer. 23:5–6)

WE WISH TO SERVE THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH OF DAVID. Not only will He save Judah, which has gone to hell, but He will also save Israel, which has already been destroyed! How can this possibly be? He'll do it.

The Righteous Branch is the Messiah to save us and restore the kingdom in such a way that we have never imagined. And here's just one way He will rule: **His Name will be called "The LORD is our righteousness."**  What can this possibly mean? Who does not like to be right? But if I may offer this thought—this blessèd thought—we will have no need of being right: He'll be right *for us*. WE WISH TO SERVE THE RIGHTEOUS BRANCH OF DAVID who will be right for us.

**"In those days and at that time I will cause a righteous Branch to spring up for David, and he shall execute justice and righteousness in the land"**  (Jer. 33:15). He will execute justice not on us, but wonderfully *on Himself*, when He enters Jerusalem as King to die—to execute justice on our sins—when He enters Jerusalem to die *bearing our sins for us*.

That day will come, and we look forward to what Luke's Gospel foretells concerning Palm Sunday:
> **They brought \[the foal] to Jesus, and throwing their cloaks on the colt, they set Jesus on it. And as he rode along, they spread their cloaks on the road. As he was drawing near—already on the way down the Mount of Olives—the whole multitude of his disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works that they had seen, saying, "Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven and glory in the highest!" And some of the Pharisees in the crowd said to him, "Teacher, rebuke your disciples." He answered, "I tell you, if these were silent, the very stones would cry out."**

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
The themes for the four Sundays of Advent are
1. Hope
2. Peace
3. Joy
4. Love