---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 30, 2025
title: HE COMES TO BRING PEACE TO JERUSALEM
occasion: 1st Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - Is. 2:1–5
  - Ps. 122
  - Rom. 13:8–14
  - Matt. 24:36–44
sermon_text: Ps. 122
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE COMES TO BRING PEACE TO JERUSALEM

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, we receive Your Son, Jesus, as our Savior — the Messiah promised by the prophets. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Happy New Year — happy new church year, that is. The themes for the four Sundays of Advent are Hope, Peace, Joy, and Love, in that order, with the pink candle lit for Joy on the Third Sunday. However, our psalm for today fits the theme of Peace as we have heard: **"Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. … Peace be within your walls."**  And so, we will pursue peace today. Also — what do you know — next week the theme of Hope comes up powerfully. So, as far as the sermon goes, we will switch the First and Second Sundays of Advent — today is Peace and next week is Hope. (The lectionary is not perfect, but God's Word is.)

The Psalms, as they appear in the lectionary, will serve as our sermon texts for this church year. Since we will not be having Bible study today in order to take the opportunity to decorate our sanctuaries for Christmas, I have added to the bulletin announcements Luther's introduction to the Psalms. Had we had Bible study today, I would have taught an introduction to the Psalms. *\[Instruct to take out bulletin]*  Please take out your bulletin and find that announcement of Luther's introduction to the Psalms. … There it is, and right away you see the word *Psalter*, spelled P‑S‑A‑L‑T‑E‑R. *\[Ask]*  Can you tell me what the Psalter is? *\[Take out pocket hymnal]*  It is the book of Psalms —  straight out of the Bible — some, possibly all 150 of the Psalms — in a book by itself. The Psalter is typically small enough to be conveniently accessed throughout the day. There, you will see the word *Psalter* and know what it is. (If you would like to have a Psalter of your own, please let me know.)

The Psalms these days are remembered by number — there are 150 of them — but they were not always numbered. Instead, the Psalms have, for a long time, been remembered by the first line. The best-known example may be when our Lord was *\[Crucifixion]*  hanging on the Cross bearing our sins He cried out, **"My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?"**  (Matt. 27:46), not only praying as He hung forsaken by His Father bearing of our sins, but also calling out a psalm. Everyone familiar with the Psalter would have known right away that He was calling out the psalm, which we today refer to as Psalm 22. Moving on to our psalm for today we have the psalm whose first verse is **"I was glad when they said to me, 'Let us go to the house of the LORD!' "**  The very next verse is **"Our feet have been standing within your gates,**  ***O Jerusalem*!"**  *\[Understatement]*  And, in case this was news to you, Jerusalem is an important city.

In fact, I would say that it is no exaggeration to say that Jerusalem, to this day is not only still an important city, but Jerusalem may be the most important city in the world — it's all spelled out in the Bible. I will avoid political and military discussion about what's going on right now in and around Jerusalem, but suffice it to say that there are a lot of guns pointed at Jerusalem and there are a lot of guns pointing out from Jerusalem. It is striking that our psalm is a prayer for *the peace* of Jerusalem. Let us hear, then, how OUR LORD JESUS COMES TO BRING PEACE TO JERUSALEM.

As the psalm begins, we are joyfully on our way to *the house of the LORD*, which refers, of course, to *the temple* in Jerusalem. In Old Testament days this was understood by the Jewish people as a joyous psalm to sing on the way to make sacrifices and prayers at the temple in the holy city Jerusalem — the city made holy by God's own presence in the cloud over the ark of the covenant, which was tucked away behind the curtain in the Holy of Holies in the temple so that sinners would not appear before God's glory and be struck down. The temple is the big deal in Jerusalem, but what makes the temple a big deal is God having chosen to be there — right there in the cloud. In fact, there's a psalm for that — here's the first verse — I won't tell you the number.
> **The LORD reigns; let the peoples tremble!** ***He sits enthroned upon the cherubim*; let the earth quake.**  (Ps. 99:1)

The cherubim are a reference to the Mercy Seat, the cover on the ark of the covenant, on which there are statues of cherubim. God is in the cloud over the Mercy Seat, **enthroned upon the cherubim**, as this psalm says.

But going back to our psalm for today we are joyfully praising God at the temple. However, the prophet Malachi has announced something *new* to happen at the temple. He has declared — and we bear this prophecy in mind — **"The Lord whom you seek will suddenly** ***come to His temple*; and the Messenger of the covenant in whom you delight, behold, He is coming, says the LORD of hosts"**  (Mal. 3:1b). (For those of you familiar with Handel's *Messiah*, take note that this very verse is sung in the *Messiah*.) Malachi has prophesied that the Lord will come to His temple. Now the Israelite could say, "He is already in the temple, in the cloud," which is true. But Malachi announces a new appearing of the Lord at His temple, which is sure interesting. Furthermore, Malachi says that the Lord is called ***the Messenger of the covenant in whom you delight***. And so, the anticipation surrounding the coming of the Messiah includes that He will come to the temple announcing a covenant — a new covenant which differs somehow from the old covenant of God's Commandments with animal blood sacrifices — and that this new covenant will be our delight.

The Messiah is coming, and He is expected at the temple with a covenant that brings us delight. But how can we say *brings us delight* if we are Gentiles — Jerusalem is the holy city of the Jews. For this, we need look no further than our Old Testament lesson, the prophecy of Isaiah.
> **It shall come to pass in the latter days that the mountain of the house of the LORD shall be established as the highest of the mountains,**

The house of the LORD being the temple, of course, and the mountain being *Mt. Zion in Jerusalem*, on which the temple stands. (Get ready to hear *Zion* over and over and over again.)
> **and \[Mt. Zion] shall be lifted up above the hills;** ***and all the nations shall flow to it*, and many peoples shall come, and say: "Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob, that He may teach us His ways and that we may walk in His paths." For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.**  (Is. 2:2–3)

Gentiles, together with the Jews, will go up to the mountain of the LORD together, according to the prophecy of Isaiah. Gentiles, together with the Jews, will be taught by the LORD.

*\[Transition]* And now let us jump forward — jump forward to when prophecy is fulfilled by the appearing of the Messiah in the temple. Before our Lord Jesus ever entered Jerusalem on Palm Sunday, He had been to the temple many times. There are three feasts, listed in Exodus, chapter 23, to which every Jewish male appeared every year: the Feast of Unleavened Bread, the Feast of Firstfruits, and the Feast of Booths. Our Lord was in Jerusalem for all of these. Emphasis is ususally put on the Passover, which inaugurates the Feast of Unleavened Bread. But do not forget the Feast of Firstfruits or the Feast of Booths (Ex. 23:14–17; Lev. 23).

Let us turn our attention to the Feast of Booths. In John, chapter 7 we find our Lord in the temple during the Feast of Booths. Malachi's prophecy is being fulfilled. For seven days during the Feast of Booths there are food offerings being brought to the LORD. The people are also living in booths for these seven days — they are living out in the open in little shelters according to God's command that Israel may remember that they dwelt in booths when the Lord brought them out of Egypt (Lev. 23:43). It is during this feast that the Lord comes to His temple.

**"Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. … Peace be within your walls."**  But what do we hear when the Lord comes to his temple during the Feast of Booths? We hear it in John, chapter 7, but before we hear from chapter 7 let us take note that by this point the Jews want to kill Jesus, as we hear in John, chapter 5:
> **This was why the Jews were seeking all the more to kill Him, because not only was He breaking the Sabbath, but he was even calling God His own Father, making Himself equal with God.**  (John 5:18)

The Jews want to kill Jesus, and it is a paradox to **"Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. … Peace be within your walls."** Now, with threats on His life, we hear the Lord speak in His temple.
> **About the middle of the feast \[of Booths] Jesus went up into the temple and began teaching. The Jews therefore marveled, saying, "How is it that this man has learning, when he has never studied?"**  (John 7:14–15)

Regardless of the threats on Jesus' life, there is no questioning the authority of His teaching — Christ opens His mouth and the people do marvel. What exactly is our Lord teaching at this point? We aren't told, but He may be teaching something like *\[Sermon on the Mount]*  the Sermon on the Mount — **"Blessèd are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven."**  But our Lord does say this:
> **My teaching is not Mine, but His who sent Me. If anyone's will is to do God’s will, he will know whether the teaching is from God or whether I am speaking on My own authority. The one who speaks on his own authority seeks his own glory; but the one who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and in him there is no falsehood.**  (John 7:16–18)

**"I was glad when they said to me, 'Let us go to the house of the LORD!' "**  to hear the Words of the Father given to the Son that we might hear it and believe — believe that Jesus is the Messiah, the Son of God who appears in the temple, seeking not His own glory, but the glory of His Father, and in whom there is no falsehood. Jesus is the Messiah and He is **the Way,** ***and the Truth*, and the Life** (John 14:6). Let us be very glad to go to the house of the LORD and hear God's pure truth — let us be very glad to go to the house of the LORD and *see* God's presence, now not hidden behind the veil with peril to sinners but *out in the open for all sinners to behold and live*.

Belovèd in the Lord, behold the Lord who has come to His temple.
> **Jerusalem — built as a city that is bound firmly together,**

This old covenant picture from our psalm testifies of the new covenant where Christ's Church is to be that city which is bound firmly together.
> **to which the tribes go up, the tribes of the LORD, as was decreed for Israel, to give thanks to the name of the LORD.**

By the new covenant of *\[altar]*  Christ's blood, shed for the forgiveness of our sins, the tribes go up, as was decreed for Israel. (This, I suspect, might be why altars in Christian churches are often accessed by going *up* to the Communion rail.) By the new covenant Israel is now both Jew and Gentile, as St. Paul teaches:
> **For not all who are descended from Israel belong to Israel, and not all are children of Abraham because they are his offspring, but "Through Isaac shall your offspring be named." This means that it is not the children of the flesh who are the children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as offspring.**  (Rom. 9:6b–8)

By the new covenant of Christ's blood, shed for the forgiveness of our sins, HE COMES TO BRING PEACE TO JERUSALEM — peace with God by the forgiveness of our sins.

By the new covenant of Christ's blood, shed for the forgiveness of our sins, we are enabled, by the grace of the Spirit, to gladly forgive those *who sin against us* and even have peace with them. HE COMES TO BRING PEACE TO JERUSALEM. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Isaiah 3:8
\[8] For Jerusalem has stumbled,
and Judah has fallen,
because their speech and their deeds are against the LORD,
defying his glorious presence. (ESV)

John 7:25–31
\[25] Some of the people of Jerusalem therefore said, “Is not this the man whom they seek to kill? \[26] And here he is, speaking openly, and they say nothing to him! Can it be that the authorities really know that this is the Christ? \[27] But we know where this man comes from, and when the Christ appears, no one will know where he comes from.” \[28] So Jesus proclaimed, as he taught in the temple, “You know me, and you know where I come from. But I have not come of my own accord. He who sent me is true, and him you do not know. \[29] I know him, for I come from him, and he sent me.” \[30] So they were seeking to arrest him, but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come. \[31] Yet many of the people believed in him. They said, “When the Christ appears, will he do more signs than this man has done?” (ESV)

John 7:37–39
\[37] On the last day of the feast, the great day, Jesus stood up and cried out, “If anyone thirsts, let him come to me and drink. \[38] Whoever believes in me, as the Scripture has said, ‘Out of his heart will flow rivers of living water.’” \[39] Now this he said about the Spirit, whom those who believed in him were to receive, for as yet the Spirit had not been given, because Jesus was not yet glorified. (ESV)

Proverbs 18:4
\[4] The words of a man’s mouth are deep waters;
the fountain of wisdom is a bubbling brook. (ESV)

Isaiah 44:3
\[3] For I will pour water on the thirsty land,
and streams on the dry ground;
I will pour my Spirit upon your offspring,
and my blessing on your descendants. (ESV)

John 7:40–44
\[40] When they heard these words, some of the people said, “This really is the Prophet.” \[41] Others said, “This is the Christ.” But some said, “Is the Christ to come from Galilee? \[42] Has not the Scripture said that the Christ comes from the offspring of David, and comes from Bethlehem, the village where David was?” \[43] So there was a division among the people over him. \[44] Some of them wanted to arrest him, but no one laid hands on him. (ESV)