---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 6, 2025
title: THIS IS THE LORD'S DOING; IT IS MARVELOUS IN OUR EYES.
occasion: 5th Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Is. 43:16-21
  - Phil. 3:4b-14
  - Luke 20:9-20
sermon_text: Luke 20:9-20
bible_version: ESV
---

# THIS IS THE LORD'S DOING; IT IS MARVELOUS IN OUR EYES.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, heavenly Father, with eyes to see and ears hear that Jesus is Your belovèd Son, and that we listen to Him and are built upon Him to be Your holy house. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, our Old Testament lesson this morning is from Isaiah, chapter 43, beginning with the sixteenth verse. And the first verses of chapter 43 may already be familiar to you.
> **But now thus says the LORD, he who created you, O Jacob, he who formed you, O Israel: "Fear not, for I have redeemed you; I have called you by name, you are mine.** ***When you pass through the waters*, I will be with you; and through the rivers, they shall not overwhelm you; when you walk through fire you shall not be burned, and the flame shall not consume you."**  (Is. 43:1–2)

When it comes to passing through the waters, we can never forget the LORD parting the Red Sea to let His people safely through, and at the same time to destroy Pharaoh's army (Ex. 14). As we approach Holy Week, we anticipate what our Lord Jesus is about to do: by His Passion and Resurrection He is about to overthrow Satan for us and destroy death itself. Belovèd in the Lord, be reminded that you will hear this word, *Passion*, often. When it comes to Holy Week, *Passion* means Christ's *suffering*—it's a church way of saying *suffering*. By His Passion and Resurrection Christ will work a great victory for us.

The crossing of the Red Sea was a great victory, prefiguring Christ's victory for us over death, victory over the devil, and victory over hell. In Exodus, chapter 15, right after the crossing of the Red Sea, is the Song of Moses. Miriam, the prophetess, sang, **"Sing to the LORD, for He has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider He has thrown into the sea"**  (Ex. 15:1, 21).

But just before that, when Israel was encamped *on the other side of the Red Sea*, the people had no idea what was about to happen—Moses knew, but the people did not. What the people did see was every chariot of Egypt coming after them, lead by hard-hearted Pharaoh.
> **When Pharaoh drew near, the people of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians were marching after them, and they feared greatly. And the people of Israel cried out to the LORD. They said to Moses, "Is it because there are no graves in Egypt that you have taken us away to die in the wilderness? What have you done to us in bringing us out of Egypt? Is not this what we said to you in Egypt: 'Leave us alone that we may serve the Egyptians'? For it would have been better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die \[here] in the wilderness."**  (Ex. 14:10–12)

*\[Understatement]*  Quite different from **"Sing to the LORD, for He has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider He has thrown into the sea."** Back on the other shore the people had no idea what was about to happen next.

*\[Transition]*  As our Lord Jesus is about to enter into Jerusalem for the last time to be crucified, very few have an idea what is about to happen next, either. And more importantly, very few have an idea what is about to happen next even though it is all foretold of Christ by the prophets. The prophet Isaiah foretold, **"Thus says the Lord GOD, 'Behold, I am the one who has laid as a foundation in Zion, a stone, a tested stone, a precious cornerstone, of a sure foundation: "Whoever believes will not be in haste" ' "**  (Is. 28:16). St. Peter points to this prophecy when he says,
> **As you come to \[Christ], a living stone rejected by men but in the sight of God chosen and precious, you yourselves like living stones are being built up as** ***a spiritual house*, to be a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ. For it stands in Scripture: "Behold, I am laying in Zion a stone, a cornerstone chosen and precious, and whoever believes in Him will not be put to shame."**  (1 Peter 2:4—6)

What is going on? The Lord is building a house. What is the Lord doing as all kinds of situations bubble up during Holy Week? The Lord is building a house. What is going on as Christ is welcomed on Palm Sunday, betrayed on Maundy Thursday, and crucified on Good Friday? The Lord is still building a house. THIS IS THE LORD'S DOING; IT IS MARVELOUS IN OUR EYES. The Lord is building a house, with Christ as the cornerstone.

God is at work building His Church as we hear in today's Holy Gospel.
> **"The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone." Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, and when it falls on anyone, it will crush him.**

Yet here our Lord does not describe *con*struction—He tells of the *de*struction of those who fall on the cornerstone. Our Lord Jesus is quoting **"The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone"**  straight from Psalm 118. (The Psalms will appear over and over and over again with Christ's Passion and Resurrection.)

And in order that we may learn how terrible it is to fall on the cornerstone, our Lord tells us another parable to help us understand: He tells us of a vineyard where grapes are grown. There is the owner of the vineyard, the landlord, and there are the tenants, whose job is to work in the owner's vineyard and pay a fair proportion of the grape harvest as rent to the landlord. Tenants pay rent to the owner—it's in the Bible. This is a business arrangement, and the deal is this: the tenants work and get to keep part of the fruit in order to make a living; the other part they owe to the owner for rent. They don't pay cash for rent: they pay part of the grapes they grow for rent. *\[Side note]*  I myself, by the way, once paid rent in a similar way. One summer when I was in college, I lived in a basement apartment and worked in the garden for rent. I liked it.

Back to the parable, though, the owner knows what to do with the grapes—he has servants stomp on the grapes with their (clean) feet to turn the grape juice into wine, which keeps—wine doesn't spoil. This is how our Lord teaches us about the kingdom of heaven, that we may understand it.

The owner sends a servant to collect rent from his tenants.
> **When the time came, he sent a servant to the tenants, so that they would give him some of the fruit of the vineyard. But the tenants beat him and sent him away empty-handed.**

"We're not gonna pay rent." This is not going well. These are wicked tenants.
> **And \[the owner] sent another servant. But they also beat and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty-handed. And he sent yet** ***a third*** **\[servant]. This one also they wounded and cast out. Then the owner of the vineyard said, "What shall I do?** ***I will send my beloved son; perhaps they will respect him*."**

It is not difficult to interpret this parable. Christ is speaking of Himself—He is implying to the scribes and chief priests that He is the Son sent by the Owner to collect the fruit. The scribes and the chief priests soon figure out that they're the tenants.
> **But when the tenants saw \[the owner's son], they said to themselves, "This is the heir. Let us kill him, so that the inheritance may be ours." And they threw him out of the vineyard and killed him.**

This is a serious moment that we would learn about … the hardening of the heart. *\[Pray]*  God forbid that anyone's heart be hardened like the hearts of the scribes and chief priests! This is exactly what any of us are in danger of, but here the scribes and chief priests fall right into it. Christ, by way of the parable, calls Himself God—He implies that He is the Son of God, sent by God the Father to collect from the tenants the fruit that is due. And instead of softening their hearts, they harden their hearts against the Spirit and they *are* going to kill the Son. This is terrible moment when the scribes and chief priests harden their hearts against Christ.

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, we need only to remember Psalm 118 to know the outcome for us, who have not hardened our heart against the Spirit, but have listened and believed that Jesus is the Son of God, who comes to Jerusalem to bear our sins for us. We hear from Psalm 118,
> **The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. THIS IS THE LORD'S DOING; IT IS MARVELOUS IN OUR EYES. This is the day that the LORD has made; let us rejoice and be glad in it.**  (Ps. 118:22–24)

This is the day of our salvation, when our heavenly Father has sent His belovèd to save us sinners and to make us his living stones. It IS THE LORD'S DOING; IT IS MARVELOUS IN OUR EYES. We do not stumble and fall on the Cornerstone: by faith in Christ we are built on Him.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Psalm 22:30–31
\[30] Posterity shall serve him;
it shall be told of the Lord to the coming generation;
\[31] they shall come and proclaim his righteousness to a people yet unborn,
that he has done it. (ESV)