---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 22, 2026
title: HE WILL REDEEM ISRAEL FROM ALL HIS INIQUITIES
occasion: 5th Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Ezek. 37:1-14
  - Ps. 130
  - Rom. 8:1-11
  - John 11:17-27, 38-53
sermon_text: Ps. 130
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE WILL REDEEM ISRAEL FROM ALL HIS INIQUITIES

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, how can it be otherwise than what You tell us, through Jesus, Your Son, our Lord. Grant us your Spirit and help us to pray and believe without wevering. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, in case you ever thought about what it means to hear and believe God's Word, remember Isaiah, chapter 55:
> **For as the rain and the snow come down from heaven and do not return there but water the earth, making it bring forth and sprout, giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater, so shall My Word be that goes out from My mouth; it shall not return to Me empty, but it shall accomplish that which I purpose, and shall succeed in the thing for which I sent it.**  (Is. 55:10–11)

Keep Isaiah 55 in mind and behold God's Word in action in today's Old Testament lesson from Ezekiel, chapter 37:
> **\[The LORD] said to me, "Prophesy over these bones, and say to them, O dry bones, hear the Word of the LORD. Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones: Behold, I will cause breath to enter you, and you shall live."**  (Ezek. 37:4–5)

And that's what happens. Ezekiel commands, as the Lord directs him, and the dry bones rattle together and are given flesh, and God breathes His life-giving Spirit into them — **"breathe on these slain, that they may live"**  — and these bones become a vast, living army (Ezek. 37:9–10)! The Lord then promises to bring them back from exile in Babylon to rebuild the temple in Jerusalem, and He says, **"I have spoken, and I will do it, declares the LORD"**  (Ezek. 37:14b). And it is done — the Lord's Word is done as surely as He says it.

*\[Transition]*  The Lord's Word is most certainly done — the Lord's Word is most certainly true — the Lord's Word and His Name are exalted above all things (Ps. 138:2). In today's Holy Gospel it is at the Word of Christ that Lazarus is raised from the dead: **"Lazarus, come out!"**  (John 11:43) We will celebrate the *physical* resurrection of our dead bodies on Easter Sunday — Alleluia! — however, this morning we pay particular attention to our *spiritual* resurrection through faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, a precursor of our physical resurrection, for we pray in today's psalm, **"HE WILL REDEEM ISRAEL FROM ALL HIS INIQUITIES."**

For St. Paul describes to us plainly the nature of our iniquities in the second chapter of Ephesians, **"\[We] were** ***dead*** **in the trespasses and sins in which \[we] once walked, following the course of this world, following the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that is now at work in the sons of disobedience"**  (Eph. 2:1–2). When, God forbid, we listen to the devil, *we're dead*, just like Adam and Eve died — we just heard it — **"dead in the trespasses and sins in which \[we] once walked."**  And there's one thing about a dead person that he cannot do: he cannot get up and do *anything* — he's *dead*. Spiritually, you and I are familiar with what it is to be those dead bones in Ezekiel's valley.

And so today we have the psalm **"Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD! O Lord, hear my voice!"**  which cries out from spiritual death or near-death. Among the psalms **"Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD!"** is not as well known as **"The LORD is my Shepherd; I shall not want."**  **"Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD!"**  Does this psalm ring a bell for you? Have you heard it before? Have you heard it often?

I have definitely heard and prayed this psalm many times because this psalm is *\[Pastoral Care Companion]*  in my Pastoral Care Companion at the beginning of a *\[cemetery]*  committal service — the graveside service where the dead are buried. (You may have heard me pray this psalm at a committal.) When I'm burying someone at the cemetery and the family and friends are gathered graveside to pay their final respects, this book directs me to pray, **"Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD! O Lord, hear my voice!"**  Because of our sin we are all graveside — every one of us — we are headed for the grave — we will face physical death, which came into the world *through* spiritual death, that is, through the sin of Adam, through faith not in God's Word but through faith in the deceit of the devil. It is written in Romans, chapter 5, **"Just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned"**  (Rom. 5:12). We then *\[chancel]*  confess our sin before God when pray in the psalm, **"If you, O LORD, should mark iniquities, O Lord, who could stand?"**  The answer is " *Not me, Lord.*  On account of my iniquities, I could never stand." We, every one of us, all fall before God on account of our sins.

*\[Transition]*  Yes, but, belovèd in the Lord, who is able to *make* us stand? There is only One: our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. **"Lazarus, come out!"**  and the dead man stands. And it is time to pray our psalm: **"But with You there is forgiveness, that You may be feared."**

First of all, with Christ there is forgiveness — there is no doubt. This is the testimony of the Bible — God's Word says so and it is done — forgiveness is won in Christ's Name. The Word of Christ and His forgiveness is that Word that is able to bring life to *anyone's* dead bones, no matter what sin we have committed. It's a miracle to make dead bones live, and it is no less a miracle of the Holy Spirit to make a spiritually dead person believe in Jesus alive again, as it is written in John, chapter 1, "We **were born, not of blood nor of the will of the flesh nor of the will of man, but of God**" (John 1:13). He *made us* live again.

There, I said it: "He made us live again." With the Word of God we have that wonderful saying and doing that are bonded together and never fall apart, as we so often see in the devil's world. What Christ has done, as we approach Holy Week, which begins a week from today — what Christ has done was foretold by the prophets — what Christ has done is *work* our salvation so that we will hear Him *\[Crucifixion]*  declare from the Cross, **"It is finished"**  (John 19:30).

*\[Conclusion]* **"But with You there is forgiveness, that You may be feared"**  might have you scratching your head because there is nothing to be afraid of knowing that God *works* our forgiveness. This is an aspect of the fear of God that comes across in this psalm, and it is not about being frightened at all — it is being sure that God is *able and willing* to forgive all our sins and *He has done it*. Belovèd in the Lord, rejoice in this: the fear of God is being confident in Christ's hard-won forgiveness. **"HE WILL REDEEM ISRAEL FROM ALL HIS INIQUITIES."** And let it be enough for us to hear, believe, and pray God's Word. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Isaiah 55:10–11
\[10] “For as the rain and the snow come down from heaven
and do not return there but water the earth,
making it bring forth and sprout,
giving seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
\[11] so shall my word be that goes out from my mouth;
it shall not return to me empty,
but it shall accomplish that which I purpose,
and shall succeed in the thing for which I sent it. (ESV)

John 5:25
\[25] “Truly, truly, I say to you, an hour is coming, and is now here, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live. (ESV)