---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: September 1, 2024
title: THE THINGS THAT COME OUT OF A PERSON
occasion: 15th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Deut. 4:1-2, 6-9
  - Eph. 6:10-20
  - Mark 7:14-23
sermon_text: Mark 7:14-23
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE THINGS THAT COME OUT OF A PERSON

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Give us that heart of flesh you promised us, O Lord, in Jesus' name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, someone does something he shouldn't have done, but if someone *else* says that the offender "has a good heart," maybe it's better—the offense is excused because the guy "has a good heart." Good hearts *are* wonderful, especially if we happen to have one.

But this I will share with you from the Bible: our hearts are always on God's radar. From Psalm 33,
> **The LORD looks down from heaven; he sees all the children of man; from where he sits enthroned he looks out on all the inhabitants of the earth, he who fashions the hearts of them all and observes all their deeds.**  (Ps. 33:13–15)

God sees all our deeds *and reads our hearts*, but what *He* says about our hearts—what He sees in our hearts—is not so flattering. From Jeremiah, chapter 17,
> **The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately sick; who can understand it? I the LORD search the heart and test the mind, to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his deeds.**  (Jer. 17:9–10)

We might say "He has a good heart," but Christ will judge our deeds according to what *He* finds in our hearts—this is serious business. We have before us today in the Holy Gospel a stark warning of how *dangerous* our hearts can be *to us*—THE THINGS THAT COME OUT OF A PERSON—the things that come out of our hearts—can be quite dangerous to us … or they can be balm to our souls.

Turning to our Holy Gospel, our Lord continues His conversation from last week—He has locked horns again with the scribes and Pharisees. Last week our Lord lays into the scribes and Pharisees for their *HERE A LITTLE, THERE A LITTLE* approach to God's Law: add a little here to God's Law and add a little there and soon you have a system of man-made rules. But this spells trouble every time. For man-made rules make those who follow them sin against *God's* rules, against God's Law, the only rules that really count. Our Lord is angry with the Pharisees and scribes because they have completely ignored Moses' teaching, the teaching which we heard clearly in today's Old Testament reading: **"You shall not add to the word that I command you, nor take from it, that you may keep the commandments of the LORD your God that I command you"**  (Deut. 4:2).

In last week's sermon we heard that *HERE A LITTLE, THERE A LITTLE* is not only wrong, but the prophet Isaiah says it's idolatry to add to God's Word. One might argue that the scribes and the Pharisees are sincere and "they have good hearts," but there's nothing good to say about idolatry and there's nothing good to say about the followers of the scribes and Pharisees being forced to break the Fourth Commandment by following the tradition of the elders. Let's take a moment to review the Fourth Commandment that the scribes and Pharisees force their followers to break by denying their parents the support they need in their old age.
> **Honor your father and your mother.**  *What does mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not despise or anger our parents and other authorities, but honor them, serve and obey them, love and cherish them.

Luther's comment on this Commandment is "What God commands must be much better and far nobler than everything that we may come up with ourselves" (LC I, 113). This *is* most certainly true.

You may remember that all this arguing with the scribes and the Pharisees began last week at the beginning of Mark, chapter 7.
> **When the Pharisees gathered to \[Jesus], with some of the scribes who had come from Jerusalem, they saw that some of \[Jesus'] disciples ate with hands that were defiled, that is, unwashed.**  (Mark 7:1–2)

The scribes and Pharisees are offended by Jesus' disciples not washing their hands before they eat. For the Old Testament Jews there *are* dietary laws that distinguish between clean meat and unclean meat (Lev. 11)—"you can eat beef, but not pork"—to mention just one of these dietary laws. But this washing of hands before a meal is never mentioned in God's Law—the Pharisees and the scribes have made it up—HERE A LITTLE, THERE A LITTLE—and this addition to God's Law is even given the fancy name "the tradition of the elders."
> **(For the Pharisees and all the Jews do not eat unless they wash their hands properly, holding to** ***the tradition of the elders*, and when they come from the marketplace, they do not eat unless they wash. And there are many other traditions that they observe, such as the washing of cups and pots and copper vessels and dining couches.)**  (Mark 7:3–4)

None of this "tradition of the elders" is commanded by God and our Lord Jesus Christ has had enough. Last week He upbraids them for making their followers break the Fourth Commandment. This week He calls out to anyone who will listen (and we are sure listening at this point),
> **Hear me, all of you, and understand: There is nothing outside a person that by going into him can defile him, but the things that** ***come out*** **of a person are what defile him.**

What comes out of us is sin. "What can this possibly mean?" his disciples ask Him.
> **"Do you not see that whatever goes into a person from outside cannot defile him, since it enters not his** ***heart*** **but his** ***stomach*, and is expelled?" (Thus he declared all foods clean.)**

Jesus brings up His highest concern *for our hearts*. Food goes into the stomach and cannot defile the heart. But what *can* defile the heart? **"What comes out of a person is what defiles him."**  Note that Jesus starts with the assumption that our hearts are no good at all and are the cause of our defilement before God. Out of our hearts **come evil thoughts, sexual immorality, theft, murder, adultery, coveting, wickedness, deceit, sensuality, envy, slander, pride, foolishness. All these evil things come from within, and they defile a person.**  THE THINGS THAT COME OUT OF A PERSON defile a person, and we are in desperate need of a change of heart. I know—"That other person needs a change of heart more than I do"—but if we are to be guided by our Lord's Word, we must confess that our hearts need replacement, for our sinful hearts threaten to defile us every day.

*\[Transition]*  At this point, belovèd in the Lord, our Lord Jesus Christ is always here to help. We will only grow to need Him more and more and He is always here among us. But let us know the Scriptures well and listen to what God has promised to us all along. *\[Cross]*  **"He was pierced for our transgressions; he was crushed for our iniquities; upon him was the chastisement that brought us peace, and with his wounds we are healed"**  (Is. 53:5). Through the mouth of the prophet Isaiah the LORD has promised to us all along the Savior who bears our sins. We know this is Jesus and that He died on the Cross bearing our sins. But more important: *we believe it with all our heart*. The benefits of believing in Him—the benefits of believing that *my* sins were upon Him and with His wounds *I* am healed—the benefits of believing that Jesus is *my* Savior, and yours—these benefits *never end*.

*One* of these benefits is that we are given *a new heart that can no longer defile us as it has in the past*. What a precious gift to be given a new heart! For through the mouth of the prophet Ezekiel we also have this which God has promised us all along. From Ezekiel 36,
> *\[Baptism]*  **I will sprinkle clean water on you, and you shall be clean from all your uncleannesses, and from all your idols I will cleanse you. And** ***I will give you a new heart, and a new spirit I will put within you*. And I will remove the heart of stone from your flesh and give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes and be careful to obey my rules.**  (Ezek. 36:25–27)

Belovèd in the Lord, do you see it all come together in Christ? The new heart we so desperately need is ours through faith in Him! That which threatens to defile us, the heart of stone, is removed, and that which makes us holy, the heart of flesh, is *given* to us by the indwelling of the *Holy* Spirit. The new heart we so desperately need is ours as surely as we are baptized in Jesus' name (Acts 2:38–39). Let us be confident that *\[font]*  Christ has washed our sins away *and* given us the new heart He has promised all along! The Holy Spirit lives in our hearts now.

Belovèd in the Lord, what are we then left to do? By faith in Christ we have it all—we have a new heart that cannot defile us. THE THINGS THAT COME OUT OF A PERSON either defile us or make us holy. Belovèd in the Lord, we have the Holy Spirit! The things that come out of us make us holy. Let there be no "holier than thou" among us, but relief—relief to have a heart that does not defile us—relief to have a heart that can truly begin to conceive that which pleases God *and actually do it*.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Notes
Deuteronomy 4:2
\[2] You shall not add to the word that I command you, nor take from it, that you may keep the commandments of the LORD your God that I command you. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 4:7
\[7] For what great nation is there that has a god so near to it as the LORD our God is to us, whenever we call upon him? (ESV)

Deuteronomy 4:9
\[9] “Only take care, and keep your soul diligently, lest you forget the things that your eyes have seen, and lest they depart from your heart all the days of your life. Make them known to your children and your children’s children— (ESV)

Deuteronomy 4:12–13
\[12] Then the LORD spoke to you out of the midst of the fire. You heard the sound of words, but saw no form; there was only a voice. \[13] And he declared to you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, that is, the Ten Commandments (Words), and he wrote them on two tablets of stone. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 5:22
\[22] “These words the LORD spoke to all your assembly at the mountain out of the midst of the fire, the cloud, and the thick darkness, with a loud voice; and he added no more. And he wrote them on two tablets of stone and gave them to me. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 5:29
\[29] Oh that they had such a heart as this always, to fear me and to keep all my commandments, that it might go well with them and with their descendants forever! (ESV)

But as He does so, we also see how Christ here fulfills God's Old Testament dietary laws about clean and unclean meat (Matt. 5:17). The law about not eating pork was to the health benefit of the Israelites but also to teach that God does distinguish between unclean and clean, sinful and holy. He calls for holiness, *but that is a problem with our hearts*, not with what we eat.
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |