---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 17, 2025
title: THE ONE WHO HAS BATHED DOES NOT NEED TO WASH, EXCEPT FOR HIS FEET.
occasion: Maundy Thursday
readings:
  - Ex. 12:1-14
  - 1 Cor. 11:23-32
  - John 13:1-17, 31b-35
sermon_text: John 13:1-17, 31b-35
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE ONE WHO HAS BATHED DOES NOT NEED TO WASH, EXCEPT FOR HIS FEET.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank You, Lord Jesus, for Your washing. Help us to wash our neighbor's feet. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, on this day that our Lord institutes Holy Communion He also washes His disciples' feet. He then sets this washing forth as an example for us to follow with each other. St. John sets the tone with the first verse of tonight's Holy Gospel. **"Before the Feast of the Passover, when Jesus knew that His hour had come to depart out of this world to the Father,** ***having loved His own who were in the world*, He loved them to the end."**

Our Lord **"having loved His own who were in the world"**  surely loves the twelve apostles and His other close disciples, but the Spirit has directed the evangelist to put it this way: **"having loved His own** ***who were in the world*,"**  so that we hear it and say, "I'm in the world, too. He loves me, too."

You may recall that later this day our Lord prays to His Father,
> **I have manifested Your name to the people whom you gave Me** ***out of the world*. Yours they were, and you gave them to Me, and they have kept your Word. … I am praying for them. I am not praying for the world but for those whom You have given Me, for they are Yours. All Mine are Yours, and Yours are Mine, and I am glorified in them. And I am no longer in the world,** ***but they are in the world*, and I am coming to You. Holy Father, keep them in Your name, which you have given Me, that they may be one, even as We are one.**  (John 17:6, 9–11)

Christ is concerned about His who are in the world, and that's you and me. *Our Lord Jesus loves us*, and He loves us to the end—His **love never fails** (1 Cor. 13:8). Our love may fail, but Christ's love for us never fails. We are *belovèd* in the Lord.

Belovèd in the Lord, we see our Lord Jesus, when the devil has already entered Judas (Luke 22:3), on the night when He knows He is about to be betrayed—we see our Lord counter not with doubt or fear, but with love. He washes our feet.
> **\[Jesus] laid aside His outer garments, and taking a towel, tied it around His waist. Then He poured water into a basin and began to wash the disciples' feet and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around Him. He came to Simon Peter, who said to Him, "Lord, do you wash my feet?" Jesus answered him, "What I am doing you do not understand now, but afterward you will understand."**

We ask the Spirit to help us take to heart what Peter is to understand about Jesus washing our feet. We are to let Jesus wash us. Christ loves us and shows His love by serving us. He knows that Peter will deny Him three times (John 18:17, 25–27). On the eve of Peter's utter failure, our Lord washes Peter's feet.
> **Peter said to him, "You shall never wash my feet." Jesus answered him, "If I do not wash you, you have no share with Me."**

Christ wants to *\[font]*  wash us. Not only does He wash us, but His is the washing *we need*. If He does not wash us we have no share with Him. I cannot hear this and not think of Baptism.
> *What is Baptism?*  Baptism is not just plain water, but it is the water included in God's command and combined with God's Word. *Which is that Word of God?*  Christ our Lord says in the last chapter of Matthew: **"Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit."**  (Matt. 28:19 NIV84)

In Baptism, Christ washes us by His Word. Also, we know the name in which we are baptized: Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Does Christ not pray, **"Holy Father, keep them in Your name"** ? "Keep them in Your Baptism."

And so tonight we hear the command to serve one another, to wash one another's feet, and blessèd are we when we do it. When we love each other, we are loving Him and testifying to the world that we are Christians. 
**"By this all people will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another."**  But part of the package is *\[font]*  Jesus having washed us, too. What is it that we have to help us to daily live each other? Our Baptism helps us live our new life of love.
> *What does such baptizing with water indicate?*  It indicates that the old Adam in us should by daily contrition and repentance be drowned and die with all sins and evil desires, and that a new man should daily emerge and arise to live before God in righteousness and purity forever.
>
> *Where is this written?*  St. Paul writes in Romans, chapter six: **"We were therefore buried with Him through Baptism into death in order that, just as Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father,** ***we too may live a new life*."**  (Rom. 6:4 NIV84)

Belovèd in the Lord, with our Baptism we are given the Spirit to live a new life of love.

When our Lord says, **"THE ONE WHO HAS BATHED DOES NOT NEED TO WASH,"**  He may simply be saying, "I only need to baptize you once to wash away your sins,  **EXCEPT FOR YOUR FEET.** " Since our feet get dirty every day, we have need to return to our Baptism daily and wash away that which is keeping us from loving each other. By grace of the Spirit we daily wash the dirt off our feet and bring forth the new man to love and serve each other.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Footnote from *Lutheran Study Bible* for John 13:10:
> The disciples already received forgiveness of sins—spiritual cleansing—from Jesus. But just as a traveler might regularly need a foot washing, so Christians must lead a life of daily repentance (contrition and faith).