---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 29, 2024
title: BEHOLD, THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY
occasion: 1st Sunday after Christmas (commemoration of David)
readings:
  - Ex. 13:1-3a, 11-15
  - Col. 3:12-17
  - Luke 2:22-40
sermon_text: Luke 2:22-40
bible_version: ESV
---

# BEHOLD, THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Holy Spirit, to repent of our sins and be raised up by our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, according to today's Holy Gospel, you might think that today, in the church calendar, must be the commemoration of Simeon, the man who comes in the Spirit into the temple to proclaim the baby Jesus as the light of both Jew and Gentile—the Christ, who is at this time but an infant, only six weeks old (Lev. 12:3–4). **"\[Simeon] took \[Jesus] up in his arms and blessed God and said,**  *\[sing]*  **'Lord, now lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace according to Thy Word, for mine eyes have seen Thy salvation, which Thou hast preparèd before the face of all people, …' "**  Yes, you have sung this Song of Simeon, the Nunc Dimittis, hundreds—could it be thousands?—of times after receiving the Sacrament, *\[altar]*  the holy body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. Simeon's eyes have seen *that which we receive with our lips* for our forgiveness and salvation. These very words are given to us by the Spirit through the mouth of Simeon as he holds the infant Jesus in his arms and blesses God.

The Song of Simeon has been, and will be, constantly on our lips. And as the church calendar, found in the hymnal, lists famous Christians to remember, we would expect Simeon to be on this list—he's *got* to be on this list. After all, didn't he give us the Nunc Dimittis, which we sing all the time? But, surprisingly, Simeon is *not* on the list. *Simon* the apostle is on the list, but Simeon is not listed for commemoration on the church calendar, believe it or not. So be it. (If you don't like it, get on the hymnal committee.)

Nevertheless, the Spirit has a few things to tell us through Simeon this morning, so we do well to pay attention. The first Word for us to hear is Simeon's song of joy at holding the infant Savior of the world in his arms—*\[sing]*  **"a light to lighten the Gentiles and the glory of Thy people I-srael."**  Alleluia! Simeon declares the holy Child to be the Savior of Israel but *also the Savior of the Gentiles*, echoing the prophets, including Micah:
> **It shall come to pass in the latter days that the mountain of the house of the LORD shall be established as the highest of the mountains, and it shall be lifted up above the hills; and** ***peoples*** **shall flow to it, and** ***many nations*** **shall come, and say: "Come, let us go up to the mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob, that he may teach us his ways and that we may walk in his paths."**  (Micah 4:1–2a)

Today's Holy Gospel tells us that Joseph and Mary marveled at the words of Simeon. For the angel Gabriel had told Mary that her Child would be given the throne of David (Luke 1:32). And the angel of the Lord had told Joseph that Mary's Child would save His people from their sins (Matt. 1:21). Who else could His people be than the Jews? The throne of David is the throne of the Jewish nation. But now Simeon has proclaimed Mary's Child to be a light for the Gentiles *and* the glory to His people Israel. This holy Child is here to save *everyone*! Alleluia! Behold this Child!

*\[Transition]*  Last week we had to look hard for something negative about the Christmas story since the negative seems to fade in the light of Christ's appearing; the most negative thing being no repentance. No turning away from sin—no bearing of fruits in keeping with repentance—no repentance means, God forbid, that our hearts are in no way prepared to receive Christ, our Savior. There is also a foreboding in what Simeon says next: **"BEHOLD, THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY in Israel, and a sign that is opposed."**  We will hear much about opposition to Christ during the season of Lent, but today I want to focus only on this statement from the lips of Simeon: **"BEHOLD, THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL AND RISING OF MANY."** Some will rise on account of Christ, but some will fall.

There is one, whose name we have already heard today, who fell—he fell badly—and that is king David, the king whose throne Christ has come to establish. We take pause today to remember how badly David fell, and—wouldn't you know?—today on the church calendar happens to be … the commemoration of David.
* David coveted Uriah's wife: he broke the Tenth Commandment. **"You shall not covet your neighbor's wife, or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor."**
* David committed adultery with her: he broke the Sixth Commandment. **"You shall not commit adultery."**
* Then David conspired to have Uriah killed: he broke the Fifth Commandment. **"You shall not murder."**

David sinned terribly (2 Sam. 11). He had it all, but Satan put in his mind to have more in a way that God had never intended–David listened to Satan and followed his flesh.

*\[Transition]*  But who was David *before* his fall? Remember how outstanding had David's trust in the Lord been when he slew Goliath (1 Sam. 17). The Spirit of the LORD had left Saul (1 Sam. 16:14) but He was in full display in David. The LORD's favor had departed from Saul and was now clearly with David. **"Saul has struck down his thousands, and David his** ***ten*** **thousands"**  (1 Sam. 18:7). The LORD had anointed David to be king in place of Saul (1 Sam. 16).

And then David fell when he coveted Bathsheba, and he fell hard, really hard. We have, however, the clear teaching of *true repentance* with king David. (This is all written for us in 2 Samuel, chapter 12.) Again, you may already know all this, but today is the day in the church calendar to remember it. The prophet Nathan confronted David with his sin by telling the tale of the poor man's dear ewe lamb that was taken from him by the rich man. When David heard it he believed that such an injustice had really happened in his kingdom. He told Nathan, **"As the LORD lives, the man who has done this** ***deserves to die*."**  

**Nathan said to David, "You are the man!"**

At this point David in no way attempts to justify his sin. He knows he deserves to die and says, **"I have sinned against the LORD."**  That, belovèd in the Lord, is perfect repentance. There's nothing else to it.

*\[Transition]*  For, belovèd in the Lord, we would rather *live*. What we next hear from Nathan's mouth is echoed by Simeon. Nathan said to repentant David, and he said it right away, **"The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die."**  … *\[Quietly]*  Alleluia! For David and you and I, repenting of our sins, want to live. And Simeon holds Jesus in his arms and says, **"BEHOLD, THIS CHILD IS APPOINTED FOR THE FALL** ***AND RISING*** **OF MANY."**  It is through this Child that we are appointed to rise from death to life by the forgiveness of our sins.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
[Feast or Festival?](https://witness.lcms.org/2011/feast-or-festival-10-2011/) A feast is technically a one-day celebration; a festival is a multi-day celebration. So, a festival is a bigger deal than a feast. The bold-font entries on LSB xi are then festivals and the regular-font entries are feasts. Commemorations are even less important, and are found listed on LSB xii–xiii.

Exodus 13:14–16
\[14] And when in time to come your son asks you, ‘What does this mean?’ you shall say to him, ‘By a strong hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt, from the house of slavery. \[15] For when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, the LORD killed all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man and the firstborn of animals. Therefore I sacrifice to the LORD all the males that first open the womb, but all the firstborn of my sons I redeem.’ \[16] It shall be as a mark on your hand or frontlets between your eyes, for by a strong hand the LORD brought us out of Egypt.” (ESV)

2 Samuel 23:1–2
\[1] Now these are the last words of David:
The oracle of David, the son of Jesse,
the oracle of the man who was raised on high,
the anointed of the God of Jacob,
the sweet psalmist of Israel:
\[2] “The Spirit of the LORD speaks by me;
his word is on my tongue. (ESV)

Ps. 111 is the Psalm of the week.

Luke 2:21 is the Holy Gospel for the Circumcision and Name of Jesus (New Year's Day).

Luke 2:21
\[21] And at the end of eight days, when he was circumcised, he was called Jesus, the name given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb. (ESV)

The Holy Gospel is the Purification of Mary and the Presentation of the Lord.