---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: September 15, 2024
title: DON'T TELL HIM HE CAN'T DO IT
occasion: 17th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Is. 50:4-10
  - James 3:1-12
  - Mark 9:14-29
sermon_text: Mark 9:14-29
bible_version: ESV
---

# DON'T TELL HIM HE CAN'T DO IT
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Help us, Holy Spirit, to never doubt our Lord Jesus. Amen.

Our Epistle lesson today is well-known for teaching us about our tongues. I had brought up two week ago that no matter how good *we say* our hearts are, *God says* our hearts are deceitful and desperately sick (Jer. 17:9–10). Well, what God says about our tongues isn't much better; we hear it in today's Epistle lesson:
> **The tongue is a fire, a world of unrighteousness. The tongue is set among our members, staining the whole body, setting on fire the entire course of life, and set on fire by hell.**

*\[Understatement]*  Okay, that's not a good review. It can't be much worse than being set on fire by hell. But our tongues,
when they're on fire, are hell. I shudder at the things I've said about other people, and I might as well throw my life away for the things I've *thought* of saying about my neighbor. Even if I thought of saying these wicked things but did not, I know that God saw my heart clearly, and it remains true:
> **The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately sick; who can understand it? I the LORD search the heart and test the mind, to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his deeds.**  (Jer. 17:9–10)

Lord, have mercy! When we are tempted to say something bad about someone else, even if it is true, let us cling to our instruction:
> **You shall not give false testimony against your neighbor.**  *What does this mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not tell lies about our neighbor, betray him, slander him, or hurt his reputation, but defend him, speak well of him, and explain everything *in the kindest way*.

Explain everything in the kindest way? Yes, explain everything in the *\[kind voice]*  kindest way. We are mercifully reminded to do so in today's Epistle reading:
> **No human being can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison. With it we bless our Lord and Father, and with it we curse people** ***who are made in the likeness of God*. … My brothers, these things ought not to be so.**  (James 3:8–10)

That troublesome person, whom I am tempted to curse, is made in God's image (Gen. 1:27). Can't deny it cuz God says it. By the grace of the Spirit,
* what God says trumps what the devil says
* what God says trumps what the world says
* what God says trumps what my sinful nature says, and shall govern what comes out of my mouth.

The troublesome person's deeds may not show it, but nevertheless the Lord tells me that he is made in God's likeness, which settles it: I will leave the cursing to God; it is not my place to curse anyone. **"Be angry, and do not sin; ponder in your own hearts on your beds, and be silent"**  (Ps. 4:4).

*\[Transition]*  And now that we're done with tongue lashings and are ready to move on, I would like to say, "Not so fast." I invite you to prayerfully consider *something else*, … more dangerous, that comes from our tongues. For this, let us turn to the Holy Gospel.
> **Someone from the crowd answered \[Jesus], "Teacher, I brought my son to you, for he has a spirit that makes him mute. And whenever it seizes him, it throws him down, and he foams and grinds his teeth and becomes rigid. So I asked your disciples to cast it out, and they were not able."**

Too bad for the disciples—their faith was lacking. *\[Ask]*  Can you anticipate our Lord's response? I bet you can.
> ***O faithless generation*, how long am I to be with you? How long am I to bear with you? Bring him to me.**

We know what's going to happen. The mute spirit will be gone soon, but now the part I want us to really hear and take to heart:
> **They brought the boy to \[Jesus]. And when the spirit saw him, immediately it convulsed the boy, and he fell on the ground and rolled about, foaming at the mouth. And Jesus asked his father, “How long has this been happening to him?" And he said, "From childhood. And it has often cast him into fire and into water, to destroy him.** ***But if you can do anything, have compassion on us and help us*."**

This last utterance from the father's mouth is horrible. It doesn't sound horrible, but it is: **"If You can do anything."**  **"** ***If*** **You can do anything"** —you've got to be kidding—that's the worst part: DON'T TELL JESUS HE CAN'T DO IT—don't even suggest it—" *If* You can do anything." We *can* suggest it, but that's unbelief in Jesus, … which more dangerous than cursing.


Among the most dangerous things the tongue can say is, "Jesus, You can't do it"—DON'T TELL HIM HE CAN'T DO IT.

Jesus, You can do anything! Lord Jesus, You can do it!

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Notes
Isaiah 49:15
\[15] “Can a woman forget her nursing child,
that she should have no compassion on the son of her womb?
Even these may forget,
yet I will not forget you. (ESV)

I believe that Christ's Passion included having His beard pulled out.
Isaiah 50:6
\[6] I gave my back to those who strike,
and my cheeks to those who pull out the beard;
I hid not my face
from disgrace and spitting. (ESV)

Isaiah 51:2
\[2] Look to Abraham your father
and to Sarah who bore you;
for he was but one when I called him,
that I might bless him and multiply him. (ESV)

Mark 8:16–21
\[16] And they began discussing with one another the fact that they had no bread. \[17] And Jesus, aware of this, said to them, “Why are you discussing the fact that you have no bread? Do you not yet perceive or understand? Are your hearts hardened? \[18] Having eyes do you not see, and having ears do you not hear? And do you not remember? \[19] When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?” They said to him, “Twelve.” \[20] “And the seven for the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?” And they said to him, “Seven.” \[21] And he said to them, “Do you not yet understand?” (ESV)

Mark 8:27–30
\[27] And Jesus went on with his disciples to the villages of Caesarea Philippi. And on the way he asked his disciples, “Who do people say that I am?” \[28] And they told him, “John the Baptist; and others say, Elijah; and others, one of the prophets.” \[29] And he asked them, “But who do you say that I am?” Peter answered him, “You are the Christ.” \[30] And he strictly charged them to tell no one about him. (ESV)

Mark 8:31–38
\[31] And he began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things and be rejected by the elders and the chief priests and the scribes and be killed, and after three days rise again. \[32] And he said this plainly. And Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him. \[33] But turning and seeing his disciples, he rebuked Peter and said, “Get behind me, Satan! For you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of man.”
\[34] And calling the crowd to him with his disciples, he said to them, “If anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. \[35] For whoever would save his life will lose it, but whoever loses his life for my sake and the gospel’s will save it. \[36] For what does it profit a man to gain the whole world and forfeit his soul? \[37] For what can a man give in return for his soul? \[38] For whoever is ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him will the Son of Man also be ashamed when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels.” (ESV)

Mark 9:7
\[7] And a cloud overshadowed them, and a voice came out of the cloud, “This is my beloved Son; listen to him.” (ESV)

James 2:24–26
\[24] You see that a person is justified by works and not by faith alone. \[25] And in the same way was not also Rahab the prostitute justified by works when she received the messengers and sent them out by another way? \[26] For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, so also faith apart from works is dead. (ESV)

James 4:7
\[7] Submit yourselves therefore to God. Resist the devil, and he will flee from you. (ESV)

James 4:17
\[17] So whoever knows the right thing to do and fails to do it, for him it is sin. (ESV)
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   |                                                                                        |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |