---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: October 5, 2025
title: INCREASE OUR FAITH!
occasion: 17th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Hab. 1:1-4; 2:1-4
  - 2 Tim. 1:1-14
  - Luke 17:1-10
sermon_text: Luke 17:1-10
bible_version: ESV
---

# INCREASE OUR FAITH!

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Lord Jesus, by the grace of Your Spirit we ask you, please,increase our faith. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, for those of us who like to hear someone tell us, *Nice job!* , there is one recognition we all look forward to—we *should* look forward to—and that is the praise of our Lord Jesus Christ on the day of His return. We long for the day when we hear Him say,
> **Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a little; I will set you over much.**  (Matt. 25:21)

A *Nice job!*  from Jesus is what we're working toward.

So it is peculiar to hear our Lord put things in a way that may sound different at the end of today's Holy Gospel:
> **So you also, when you have done all that you were commanded, say, … "We are unworthy servants; we have only done what was our duty."**

Should we perhaps shade this text to add some praise for what we have done well in Jesus' name? Better not change a thing—let Christ speak and we will listen. And so we begin from the top of today's Holy Gospel, and we listen.
> **Temptations to sin are sure to come, but woe to the one through whom they come! It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck and he were cast into the sea than that he should cause one of these little ones to sin.**

While we are out there in the world—and I want to put this to believers—for we know that without the Holy Spirit we should expect nothing other than **the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters and everyone who loves and practices falsehood** (Rev. 22:15). But *with* the Holy Spirit, that is, among us who confess Christ, we should not scandalize anyone—that should be beyond us. Not only should we not cause anyone to sin or damage his or her faith, but we take note of Christ's warning: " **It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck and he were cast into the sea than that he should cause one of these little ones to sin."**  Our Lord uses the strongest language to warn us *not* to cause one of these little ones to sin.

Here I am invited to ask myself the question: does anything I do cause a believer to sin? That is the question. Our Lord puts it to us as the *big* question: does anything I do cause a fellow believer to sin? And so, let us mark this as a priority as we endeavor to be ready for our Lord's return, because our Lord marks it as a priority in today's Holy Gospel—do not be a cause of someone else's sin.

Our Lord says ***little ones***—does anything I do cause *a child* to sin? Take anger, for example. Does my angry response bear bad fruit in someone else—or, God forbid, in a child? Or take cell phones, for example. School administrators warn me and I have seen myself in the classroom what sin children are getting into with cell phones. In the light of our Lord's warning, who is putting sin in the hands of children? I would put a cell phone in the hands of my child for safety, but at what risk to sin? What if he is drawn into sin by social media?

Does anything I do cause a child to sin? Does anything I do cause a believer to sin? This is where our Lord directs us to be vigilant because our He will call us to account for it. It may be wiser to set aside the emphasis on *I'm gonna do this* and *I'm gonna do that* to focus on *Lord, can you please help me to not cause others to stumble*? That, belovèd in the Lord, will go a long way toward our hearing *\[thumbs up]*  *Nice job!*  on the day of our Lord's return.

Let us continue in our Holy Gospel. **"Pay attention to yourselves!"**  It is wiser and more effective for me to pay attention to myself instead of what I think someone else should be doing—and—boy!—do I *need* to pay attention to myself if I'm going to walk in a way that does not cause my neighbor to sin.

We continue. **"If your brother sins, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him, and if he sins against you seven times in the day, and turns to you seven times, saying, 'I repent,' you must forgive him."**  Repentance and forgiveness—repentance and forgiveness—that is the pattern of our lives with each other as it is with our Lord. *\[Crucifixion]*  Thank You, Lord Jesus, for declaring to us *Your* forgiveness as You hung on the Cross, bearing our sins—our sins put You there. **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do"**  (Luke 23:34a). Therefore, belovèd in the Lord, it is an honor—praise Jesus!—to pray the same—and to mean it—for those who sin against us.

And when it comes to repentance, let us ever remember *\[font]*  our Baptism in which our sinful flesh was drowned when our Lord gave us His Spirit (Acts 2:38). And when it comes to forgiveness, let us return often *\[altar]* —for we need it often—to receive our Lord's true body and blood, given and shed for us for *the forgiveness of sins*. Our Lord knows us well and takes perfect care of us.

But all that being said—again going back to today's Holy Gospel—but all that being said, the disciples, when they were listening to our Lord teach them, became acutely aware that they were deficient—they realized what they lacked in order to be able to forgive their neighbor and to be able to not be a cause of of someone else's sin. The disciples became aware of what they lacked, so they cried out to our Lord, **"INCREASE OUR FAITH!"**

The disciples realized that they lacked faith. **"INCREASE OUR FAITH!"**  was the request, and let us now hear the Lord's answer to this request. **"If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you could say to this mulberry tree, 'Be uprooted and planted in the sea,' and it would obey you."**  *\[Humor]*  Well, seeing that I see no trees flying into Lake Erie, I would have to agree that we are of little faith.

How, then, are we to acquire a *bigger* faith? *\[Illustration]*  Belovèd in the Lord, if we work out, if we exercise our bodies, what happens? Our bodies get stronger. I interpret the following verses to be our Lord's instructions for us to work out so that our faith gets stronger.

**"Will any one of you who has a servant plowing or keeping sheep say to him when he has come in from the field, 'Come at once and recline at table'?"**  When we have done what we have been given to do by our Lord Jesus, are we looking for a break? (Frankly, I'm looking for a break most of the time.) But hear what our Lord says:
> **Will \[the master] not rather say to \[his servant], "Prepare supper for me, and dress properly, and serve me while I eat and drink, and afterward you will eat and drink"? Does he thank the servant because he did what was commanded?**

Belovèd in the Lord, that is a rhetorical question. **"Does he thank the servant because he did what was commanded?"**  *\[Ask]*  What is the answer? No—the servent does not even get a *Nice job!*  That is not the answer we wanted, especially as we look forward to hearing *Nice job!*  on the day of our Lord's return.

Belovèd in the Lord—behold!—our faith in Jesus just got strengthened. For when we seek recognition for our works, what have our works become? An idol. This faith exercise—to gladly do what the Lord has given us to do and then turn around and prepare supper without a grumble slowly pushes the idol of our own works out of our hearts. And when the idol is out, we say, without blinking an eye, **"We are unworthy servants; we have only done what was our duty."**  Jesus is our Lord, and we are more than happy to serve Him. And did our Lord not say,
> **When you give to the needy, do not let your left hand know what your right hand is doing, so that your giving may be in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you.**  (Matt. 6:3–4)?

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Habakkuk was written between the fall of Samaria (722) and the fall of Jerusalem (586).

Hab. 2:4 quoted 3 times in the NT:

Romans 1:17
\[17] For in it the righteousness of God is revealed from faith for faith, as it is written, “The righteous shall live by faith.” (ESV)

Galatians 3:11
\[11] Now it is evident that no one is justified before God by the law, for “The righteous shall live by faith.” (ESV)

Hebrews 10:36–38
\[36] For you have need of endurance, so that when you have done the will of God you may receive what is promised. \[37] For,
“Yet a little while,
and the coming one will come and will not delay;
\[38] but my righteous one shall live by faith,
and if he shrinks back,
my soul has no pleasure in him.” (ESV)

Habakkuk 3:17–18
\[17] Though the fig tree should not blossom,
nor fruit be on the vines,
the produce of the olive fail
and the fields yield no food,
the flock be cut off from the fold
and there be no herd in the stalls,
\[18] yet I will rejoice in the LORD;
I will take joy in the God of my salvation. (ESV)

John 14:12–14
\[12] “Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in me will also do the works that I do; and greater works than these will he do, because I am going to the Father. \[13] Whatever you ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. \[14] If you ask me anything in my name, I will do it. (ESV)

*Eunice* is the Latinized form of the Greek name *Εὐνίκη (Eunike)*  meaning "good victory." Eunice was Timothy's mother; Lois was his grandmother.