---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 2, 2025
title: DIFFERENT, BUT THE SAME
occasion: The Transfiguration of our Lord
readings:
  - Deut. 34:1-2
  - Heb. 3:1-6
  - Luke 9:28-36
sermon_text: Luke 9:28-36
bible_version: ESV
---

# DIFFERENT, BUT THE SAME

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, heavenly Father, with a double portion of Your Spirit, that we may behold your Son and live. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, on the mount of Christ's Transfiguration we have heaven open once again. *\[Baptism]*  At Christ's Baptism, heaven was open, the Father's voice was heard, and the Holy Spirit descended on Christ as a dove. Today, at the Transfiguration, Christ glows, the prophets Moses and Elijah are present, and the apostles Peter, James, and John are in awe to hear the Father's voice *from heaven* say, **"This is my Son, my Chosen One; listen to Him!"**  And, by the grace of the Spirit, listen to Him we do. Before we had Christ to listen to, though, we had Elijah and we had Moses.

They are both, Moses and Elijah—note that they are both *alive* on the Mount of Transfiguration and share Christ's glory. They are both alive in glory with Christ *and* we are even told on this occasion what they, Christ, Elijah, and Moses, are talking about in their glory: they are talking about *the Cross*. Our text says they **\[speak] of \[Christ's] departure, which He \[is] about to accomplish at Jerusalem**. At this point I want to say that when I say *the Cross*, this is church shorthand for **\[Christ's] departure, which He \[is] about to accomplish at Jerusalem**. Christ will suffer in Jerusalem during Holy Week, especially when He is scourged and nailed to the Cross *and dies* bearing our sins. *Christ's Cross* is church shorthand for this very subject that Christ discusses with Moses and Elijah: the Cross is shorthand for **\[Christ's] departure, which He \[is] about to accomplish at Jerusalem**.

*\[Transition]*  At this point I want to undertake a comparison of these two great Old Testament prophets: Moses and Elijah. Both Moses and Elijah are with Christ at His Transfiguration. Moses and Elijah are DIFFERENT, BUT THE SAME—they are most definitely the same in that—here they are—they are *both alive* and *both together with Christ*. But here's the difference: Moses died and was buried. Elijah never died a natural death, but was taken straight up into heaven. There's a difference.

Hear the account of Moses' death from Deuteronomy.
> **The LORD spoke to Moses, "Go up this mountain of the Abarim, Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, opposite Jericho, and view the land of Canaan,** \[view the Promised Land,]  **which I am giving to the people of Israel for a possession. And** ***die on the mountain*** **which you go up, and be gathered to your people, as Aaron your brother died in Mount Hor and was gathered to his people,** ***because you broke faith with me in the midst of the people of Israel at the waters of Meribah-kadesh*, in the wilderness of Zin, and because** ***you did not treat me as holy in the midst of the people of Israel*.**  (Deut. 32:48–51)

Moses, apparently out of anger and frustration, had *struck* the rock that the LORD had commanded him to *speak* to in order to bring forth water (Num. 20:8–11) for the Israelites and their livestock to drink in the wilderness. Moses rebelled against God in front of the people of Israel, for all to see that even their leader, Moses, does not listen to God. Apparently, the people had heard the command of the LORD that Moses *speak* to the rock, but they saw Moses *strike* the rock instead. Although water did gush out from that rock, Moses had sinned publicly against the LORD. And for that, Moses is sentenced to die and he is denied the opportunity to complete what he had worked hard for: he is denied the opportunity to lead the people of Israel into the Promised Land. God will give the leadership to Joshua; Joshua will lead them into the Promised Land. Moses saw the Promised Land from Mount Nebo but He did not enter it.

**"So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD, and** ***He buried him*** **in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor; but no one knows the place of his burial to this day"**  (Deut. 34:5–6). The Bible describes to us that Moses died with the LORD attending and that *the LORD Himself* buried Moses.

*\[Transition]*  Now Elijah, as many of you know, left his earthly life quite differently. It is written in 2 Kings, chapter 2,
> **Elijah said to Elisha, "Ask what I shall do for you, before I am taken from you." And Elisha said, "Please let there be a double portion of your spirit on me." And \[Elijah] said, "You have asked a hard thing; yet, if you see me as I am being taken from you, it shall be so for you, but if you do not see me, it shall not be so." And as they still went on and talked, behold, chariots of fire and horses of fire separated the two of them.** ***And Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven*.** (Elijah went up into heaven alive.)  **And Elisha saw it and he cried, "My father, my father! The chariots of Israel and its horsemen!" And he saw him no more. Then \[Elisha] took hold of his own clothes and tore them in two pieces.** (2 Kings 2:9b–12)

And so, comparing Elijah to Moses, we might argue that Elijah was better than Moses. Moses died but Elijah did not. But, belovèd in the Lord, what we see at Christ's Transfiguration with Moses and Elijah both there—both alive and well—both sharing in Christ's glory—what we see, belovèd in the Lord, is that *where Christ is death is not*. That is proclaimed to us plainly on the Mount of Christ's Transfiguration. Make all the differences you want. Elijah and Moses are DIFFERENT, BUT THE SAME—they both arrive *alive with Christ* on the Mount of Transfiguration.

Belovèd in the Lord, as terrifying as it may be to be in the presence of holy God, that which we fear, that God would see our sin and punish us for it, is a non-issue when we are with Christ, when we behold Him as our Savior from our sin. His is the Cross. Ours is but to believe in Him, to behold Him in faith that we are saved by His Cross *\[Resurrection]*  and Resurrection. His it is to bear for us that which we fear. Are we to bear our own sins in any way? Are we to be objects of God's holy wrath against our sin? Are we, *\[font]*  after we are baptized and believe, to bear any punishment whatsoever to pay for the sins that Jesus bore for us on the Cross? No. We are forgiven and we are alive with Moses, Elijah, Peter, James, and John on the Mount of Transfiguration, where heaven is open.

*\[Conclusion]*  Belovèd in the Lord, Heaven will be open once again. *\[Ask]*  When in the Bible will we next see heaven open?
> **But \[Stephen], full of the Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God. And he said, "Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God." But they cried out with a loud voice and stopped their ears and rushed together at him. Then they cast him out of the city and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul. And as they were stoning Stephen, he called out, "Lord Jesus, receive my spirit." And falling to his knees he cried out with a loud voice, "Lord, do not hold this sin against them." And when he had said this, he fell asleep.**  (Acts 7:55–60)


**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Exodus 33:11
\[11] Thus the LORD used to speak to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend. When Moses turned again into the camp, his assistant Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, would not depart from the tent. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 34:10
\[10] And there has not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom the LORD knew face to face, (ESV)

God spoke with Moses face-to-face, but you can say that do did Elijah.

1 Kings 19:9–18
\[9] There he came to a cave and lodged in it. And behold, the word of the LORD came to him, and he said to him, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” \[10] He said, “I have been very jealous for the LORD, the God of hosts. For the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, thrown down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword, and I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” \[11] And he said, “Go out and stand on the mount before the LORD.” And behold, the LORD passed by, and a great and strong wind tore the mountains and broke in pieces the rocks before the LORD, but the LORD was not in the wind. And after the wind an earthquake, but the LORD was not in the earthquake. \[12] And after the earthquake a fire, but the LORD was not in the fire. And after the fire the sound of a low whisper. \[13] And when Elijah heard it, he wrapped his face in his cloak and went out and stood at the entrance of the cave. And behold, there came a voice to him and said, “What are you doing here, Elijah?” \[14] He said, “I have been very jealous for the LORD, the God of hosts. For the people of Israel have forsaken your covenant, thrown down your altars, and killed your prophets with the sword, and I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.” \[15] And the LORD said to him, “Go, return on your way to the wilderness of Damascus. And when you arrive, you shall anoint Hazael to be king over Syria. \[16] And Jehu the son of Nimshi you shall anoint to be king over Israel, and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah you shall anoint to be prophet in your place. \[17] And the one who escapes from the sword of Hazael shall Jehu put to death, and the one who escapes from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha put to death. \[18] Yet I will leave seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth that has not kissed him.” (ESV)

Deuteronomy 32:48–51
\[48] That very day the LORD spoke to Moses, \[49] “Go up this mountain of the Abarim, Mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, opposite Jericho, and view the land of Canaan, which I am giving to the people of Israel for a possession. \[50] And die on the mountain which you go up, and be gathered to your people, as Aaron your brother died in Mount Hor and was gathered to his people, \[51] because you broke faith with me in the midst of the people of Israel at the waters of Meribah-kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin, and because you did not treat me as holy in the midst of the people of Israel. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 34:5–6
\[5] So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of the LORD, \[6] and he buried him in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor; but no one knows the place of his burial to this day. (ESV)

The LORD put Moses to death and then buried him. Moses died and Elijah did not.

2 Kings 2:9–12
\[9] When they had crossed, Elijah said to Elisha, “Ask what I shall do for you, before I am taken from you.” And Elisha said, “Please let there be a double portion of your spirit on me.” \[10] And he said, “You have asked a hard thing; yet, if you see me as I am being taken from you, it shall be so for you, but if you do not see me, it shall not be so.” \[11] And as they still went on and talked, behold, chariots of fire and horses of fire separated the two of them. And Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven. \[12] And Elisha saw it and he cried, “My father, my father! The chariots of Israel and its horsemen!” And he saw him no more.
Then he took hold of his own clothes and tore them in two pieces. (ESV)

Romans 6:23
\[23] For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. (ESV)

Might have Elijah performed better than Moses?

Galatians 3:26–27
\[26] for in Christ Jesus you are all sons of God, through faith. \[27] For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ. (ESV)

Hebrews 3:3
\[3] For Jesus has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses—as much more glory as the builder of a house has more honor than the house itself. (ESV)

Jude 9
\[9] But when the archangel Michael, contending with the devil, was disputing about the body of Moses, he did not presume to pronounce a blasphemous judgment, but said, “The Lord rebuke you.” (ESV)

Collect:
O God, in the glorious transfiguration of Your beloved Son You confirmed the mysteries of the faith by the testimony of Moses and Elijah. In the voice that came from the bright cloud You wonderfully foreshowed our adoption by grace.