---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 15, 2026
title: LISTEN TO HIM, LEST HE BE ANGRY
occasion: The Transfiguration of our Lord
readings:
  - Ex. 24:8-18
  - Ps. 2
  - 2 Pet. 1:16-21
  - Philem. 15-16
  - Matt. 17:1-9
sermon_text: Ps. 2
bible_version: ESV
---

# LISTEN TO HIM, LEST HE BE ANGRY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank you, heavenly Father, for giving us Your Son, and bless us with Your Spirit that we listen to Him. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, the season of Epiphany begins with the Baptism of our Lord and ends with the Transfiguration of our Lord — they are the bookends to our season. First, the Baptism of our Lord: *\[Baptism]*
> **Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him. John would have prevented Him, saying, "I need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?" But Jesus answered him, "Let it be so now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness." Then he consented. And when Jesus was baptized, immediately He went up from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened to Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming to rest on Him; and behold, a voice from heaven said, "This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased."**  (Matt. 3:13–17)

And then the Transfiguration of our Lord:
> **After six days Jesus took with Him Peter and James, and John his brother, and led them up a high mountain by themselves. And He was transfigured before them, and His face shone like the sun, and His clothes became white as light. And behold, there appeared to them Moses and Elijah, talking with Him. And Peter said to Jesus, "Lord, it is good that we are here. If You wish, I will make three tents here, one for You and one for Moses and one for Elijah." He was still speaking when, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them, and a voice from the cloud said, "This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; LISTEN TO HIM."**  (Matt. 17:1–5)

There, we've heard them side-by-side: Christ's Baptism and Christ's Transfiguration. Though His Transfiguration was up on the mountain and His Baptism was down in the valley, they are similar, especially with the Father's voice being heard on both occasions: at His Baptism, **"This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased,"**  and at His Transfiguration, **"This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; LISTEN TO HIM."** We take note of the add-on spoken by the Father at Christ's Transfiguration:  **"Listen to My Son."**

We also have today Psalm 2: **"Why do the nations rage?"**
> **Why do the nations rage and the peoples plot in vain? The kings of the earth set themselves and the rulers take counsel together, against the LORD and against His anointed, saying, "Let us burst Their bonds apart and cast away Their cords from us."**

Sounds like the nations do *not* want to listen to the LORD and His anointed — they do *not* want anything to do with the Father and the Son. **"Let us burst Their bonds apart and cast away Their cords from us"**  — the world perceives that listening to Jesus is slavery from which we need to be freed. The world's perception is a faulty perception and quite a sad state of affairs.

*\[Transition]*  Belovèd in the Lord, listening to Jesus is the way to go — the Father tells us so. Let us pause to consider what listening is — just listening. Spring is around the corner, and what will I soon hear early in the morning? I'll hear the birds and be glad. Listening touches the soul.

Listening to birds is one thing but listening to someone else is another. When someone's talking, either we are listening or we are not. And there are times when we appreciate someone listening to us. And there are other times when someone appreciates us listening to him or to her. And when listening is lacking we have what we call "talking past each other," which is also a sad state of affairs. Think about it — for better or for worse listening is at the center of our lives — listening may even be bigger than our physical health! Listening is who we are — how we hear — what we hear — whom we choose to listen to — whom we ignore — *whom we believe* and whom we do not trust.

Belovèd in the Lord, I invite you to believe Jesus at the Father's invitation, **"This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; LISTEN TO HIM."**  And going back to our psalm, **"Why do the nations rage?"**  is also about the Son — this psalm is universally recognized to be about Jesus — and we hear, **"Kiss the Son, LEST HE BE ANGRY, and you perish in the way, for His wrath is quickly kindled."**  The Bible does teach, "LISTEN TO HIM, LEST HE BE ANGRY."

But watch out, because here the devil loves to sow confusion — he loves to make Jesus strictly a lawgiver — "do this or else" — "do this or else I'll be angry." If that were all there is to Jesus, we sinners would have no hope because the "or else" is surely coming. And I do hope that you have listened to the Scriptures enough that you are already remembering what the Son Himself says in John, chapter 3. Let us listen to Him.
> **For God so loved the world, that He gave His only Son, that** ***whoever believes in Him*** **should not perish but have eternal life. For God did not send His Son into the world to condemn the world, but in order that the world might be saved through Him.**  (John 3:16–17)

And I pray you were listening — the Son speaking. Is He saying, "Do this or else"? No! He's saying, "I have come to save you from 'or else.' Believe that I have come to save you and you are already saved." Does He say, "Do this task first and then I'll save you?" No! He says, "Only believe that I have done it *for you* and you're already saved. You need not lift a finger." At the Mount of Transfiguration we hear the Father's voice direct our attention to His only-begotten Son, " **This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased; LISTEN TO HIM.**  Believe in Him and you will not perish."

Belovèd in the Lord, this is our faith. The Transfiguration of our Lord shows that God's glory has come to us sinners and the Old Testament prophecies are fulfilled in the person of the Son, with whom the Father is well pleased — well pleased because deep in His heart our Father in heaven wants nothing more than to show mercy on us sinners — He has sent His Son **not to call the righteous, but sinners** (Matt. 9:13). Calling sinners is emphasized at the Baptism of Our Lord where He's the Sinless One *choosing* to be baptized with us — *wanting* to be baptized with us and for us — to be filled with the Spirit to save us. He hasn't saved us yet, that is, He hasn't saved us by being baptized in the Jordan by John the Baptist — He hasn't saved us by being transfigured before Peter, James, and John — He's *\[Crucifixion]*  headed to the Cross, and there He *will* save us, the sinless Lamb of God bearing our sin — He *will* save us, as his holy, precious blood is shed to atone for our sin.

When He has finished His work on the Cross and *\[Resurrection]*  risen from the dead in victory — Alleluia! — then He will *\[font]*  wash us and *\[altar]*  feed us with the forgiveness He won for us. Even Christians, who believe in Him by the grace of the Spirit, will declare Christ's forgiveness with His own authority (John 20:22–23), and cast out demons and heal the sick. This fulfills God's righteousness, and He is happy.

LISTEN TO HIM, LEST HE BE ANGRY. LISTEN TO HIM because there is salvation in on one else — because there is no one else to listen to who is able to deliver us from our sin and declare us forgiven. **"Whoever believes in Jim is not condemned, but whoever does not believe is condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God"**  (John 3:18). **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Did Moses actually see God's glory in Ex. 24? No, it appears not because he asks to see His glory later, in Ex. 33.

Exodus 33:18–20
\[18] Moses said, “Please show me your glory.” \[19] And he said, “I will make all my goodness pass before you and will proclaim before you my name ‘The LORD.’ And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy. \[20] But,” he said, “you cannot see my face, for man shall not see me and live.” (ESV)

Holy always puts the terror in unholy.

Leviticus 10:1–2
\[1] Now Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, each took his censer and put fire in it and laid incense on it and offered unauthorized fire before the LORD, which he had not commanded them. \[2] And fire came out from before the LORD and consumed them, and they died before the LORD. (ESV)