---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: October 19, 2025
title: THEY NEVER GAVE UP
occasion: 19th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Gen. 32:22-30
  - 2 Tim. 3:14-4:5
  - Luke 18:1-8
sermon_text: Luke 18:1-8
bible_version: ESV
---

# THEY NEVER GAVE UP

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, gracious Father, with Your Spirit that we never give up from praying or from claiming that which You have promised. In You Son's name, Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have before us today *persistence*—*keep trying*—*don't give up*. *Don't give up* may be some of the the most powerful words you have ever heard, if you heard these words when you were too weak to go on—if you heard these words from the right person at the right time. "Don't give up: you can make it." You heard these words—you did not give up—you did make it, and here you are—you did not give up.

And in case you thought that wanting to give up was unheard of among the saints of the Bible, think again. *\[Ask]*  Do you remember that Elijah wanted to give up? Remember how he felt while Jezebel was going after him and do you remember what he said?
> **\[Elijah] went a day's journey into the wilderness and came and sat down under a broom tree. And he asked that he might die, saying, "It is enough; now, O LORD,** ***take away my life*, for I am no better than my fathers."**  (1 Ki. 19:4)

*\[Ask]*  Do you remember that Moses also wanted to give up? Remember how the Israelites had complained in the wilderness.
> **Now the rabble that was among \[the Israelites] had a strong craving. And the people of Israel also wept again and said, "Oh that we had meat to eat! We remember the fish we ate in Egypt that cost nothing, the cucumbers, the melons, the leeks, the onions, and the garlic. But now our strength is dried up, and there is nothing at all but this manna to look at."**  (Num. 11:4–6)

The Israelites, God's chosen people, were already fed with bread from heaven, but they still complained and it wore on Moses.
> **Moses heard the people weeping throughout their clans, everyone at the door of his tent. And the anger of the LORD blazed hotly, and Moses was displeased. Moses said to the LORD, "Why have You dealt ill with Your servant? And why have I not found favor in Your sight, that you lay the burden of all this people on me? … I am not able to carry all this people alone; the burden is too heavy for me. If You will treat me like this,** ***kill me at once*, if I find favor in Your sight, that I may not see my wretchedness."**  (Num. 11:10–11, 14–15)

All this is to say that if you ever feel like you want to give up, you are in the company of Moses and Elijah.

It must be mentioned at this point that the Bible clearly teaches that Satan wants us to give up on God. This is clearly seen with Job, whom God allowed Satan to afflict. ″ut Job would not give up; his famous confession of faith being **"The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away; blessèd be the name of the LORD"**  (Job 1:21). The book of Job has been given to us for the Lord could tell us, *Don't give up*.

The Lord has also given us today's Old Testament lesson—again, to tell us, *Don't give up*. **"\[Jacob] arose and took his two wives, his two female servants, and his eleven children, and crossed the ford of the Jabbok."**  He is traveling with his wives, Rachel and Leah, along with their female servants, Bilhah and Zilpah; he also has with him his eleven sons, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah, Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher, Issachar and Zebulun, and Joseph, who is the only one of the eleven who who was borne by Rachel, Benjamin has not been born yet. Jacob is returning home from Paddan-aram, where he has gotten his wives and his sons have been born. He had fled from home in fear of his brother Esau, but now he's coming back to the Promised Land, where Esau is waiting for him. That's Jacob's situation in our Old Testament lesson. "Cross that stream and you're back home—back in the Promised Land."
> **\[Jacob] took \[his family] and sent them across the stream, and everything else that he had. And Jacob was left alone. And a Man wrestled with him until the breaking of the day.**

Who is this man who wrestles with Jacob at the Jabbok? Some man—we don't know yet who He is—comes after Jacob. Jacob resists him and they wrestle—not for a few minutes, not for an hour, but they wrestle *all night long*—that's exhausting! And neither of them gives up. Who is this Man and why does He wrestle Jacob?
> **When the Man saw that He did** ***not*** **prevail against Jacob, He touched his hip socket, and Jacob's hip was put out of joint as he wrestled with Him. Then \[the Man] said, "Let Me go, for the day has broken." But Jacob said, "I will not let you go unless you bless me."**

Jacob is setting the terms—He will not give up without a blessing from his opponent. Who is this Man and why does He hurt Jacob and put his hip out of joint?

And what may be on Jacob's mind? We do well to remember *Jacob's ladder*—the dream Jacob saw as he was leaving the Promised Land to go to Paddan-aram in the first place.
> **\[Jacob] dreamed, and behold, there was a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven. And behold, the angels of God were ascending and descending on it! And behold, the LORD stood above it and said, "I am the LORD, the God of Abraham your father and the God of Isaac.** ***The land on which you lie I will give to you and to your offspring.*** **"**  (Gen. 28:12–13)

That's a promise. I believe that the dream with the stairway to heaven is on Jacob's mind as he wrestles with the Man at the Jabbok. That land across the Jabbok has been promised to him and his offspring *by the LORD*! Jacob is claiming God's promise as he wrestles all night long with the man. "Bless me to cross the Jabbok and claim what God has promised me."

But who is wrestling with Jacob to stop him?
> **And \[the Man] said to \[Jacob], "What is your name?" And he said, "Jacob." Then He said, "Your name shall no longer be called Jacob, but Israel, for you have striven with God and with men, and have prevailed."**

And *Israel*, in case you didn't know, literally means *He strives with God*. This is where the name *Israel* comes from and it literally mean *He strives with God*. Wait!—strives with whom?
> **Then Jacob asked Him, "Please tell me your name." But He said, Why is it that you ask my name?" And there He blessed him. So Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, saying, "For I have seen God face to face, and yet my life has been delivered."**

For *Peniel* literally means *the face of God*. It is remarkable that God has allowed Jacob to see His face and live. Others could see God's face and die, but here we have Jacob wrestle with God and see His face and *live*.

Clearly, God *wants* Jacob to live—God *wants* to bless Jacob in the Promised Land. But why the injury—why dislocate Jacob's hip? Dads, have you ever wrestled your sons? Did you go hard or did you to easy? Many of us go hard because we love it when our sons are strong. (We want our daughters to be strong, too, but they're special.) Jacob's faith is strong—his faith is more than strong enough to put up with a dislocated hip and keep wrestling until God blesses him.

*\[Transition]*  Belovèd in the Lord, this is given to us in the Scriptures so that we can hear God tell us, "Don't give up. Don't give up on anything I have promised you in the name of Jesus, My Son." For, belovèd in the Lord, do not forget what *else* God had promised Jacob in that dream: **"Your seed shall be like the dust of the earth, and you shall spread abroad to the west and to the east and to the north and to the south, and in you and your Seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed"**  (Gen. 28:14). And that seed, St. Paul teaches us in *Galatians* 3:16—that seed in which all the families of the earth are blessed, is Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God *\[Crucifixion]*  who takes away the sin of the world (John 1:29). All families of the earth have been born in sin, but Christ came for all of us—He takes away the sin of the world.

And so, confessing our sins and believing that all is forgiven in Jesus' name. We listen carefully to what He promises us in John, chapter 14:
> **Truly, truly, I say to you, whoever believes in Me will also do the works that I do; and greater works than these will he do, because I am going to the Father. Whatever you ask in My name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. If you ask Me anything in My name,** ***I will do it*.**  (John 14:12–14)

There, belovèd in the Lord, is our promise to claim. There is no limit to what we can do in Jesus' name, but we have Christ's promise to hear and answer and do anything we ask in His name that is not a prayer simply to spend it our own passions (James 4:3).

With this in our belts, we not turn to the persistent widow in today's Holy Gospel.
> **In a certain city there was a judge who neither feared God nor respected man. And there was a widow in that city who** ***kept coming to him*** **and saying, "Give me justice against my adversary."**

She does not give up till the judge gives her justice against her adversary. What does our Lord teach us with the persistent widow: "Don't give up praying. I'll do it."

When our Lord returns to judge the living and the dead, will He find faith on earth?—will He find us praying and never giving up? By the grace of the Spirit He will! "I'll never give up, … or I'll die trying. **For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain**." (Phil. 1:21) The persistent widow pleading with the judge, and Jacob wrestling with God—THEY NEVER GAVE UP. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes