---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: September 22, 2024
title: HE MUST BE LAST OF ALL AND SERVANT OF ALL
occasion: 18th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Jer. 11:18-20
  - James 3:13-4:10
  - Mark 9:30-47
sermon_text: Mark 9:30-47
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE MUST BE LAST OF ALL AND SERVANT OF ALL

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Dear Lord Jesus, You have taught us, **"If anyone would be first, he must be last of all and servant of all."**  Help us, Lord, to believe it and do it in Your name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, there may be a thing or two in life that He turns on its head, for example, forgiving our enemies (Matt. 5:44). Hasn't He ever heard about *payback*? He turns it on its head, like every man **who looks at a woman with lustful intent has already committed adultery with her in his heart** (Matt. 5:28). Hasn't He ever heard about *girlie magazines*? Our Lord Jesus also turns it on its head when, in our Holy Gospel, He says, **"If anyone would be** ***first*, HE MUST BE LAST OF ALL AND SERVANT OF ALL."**  Hasn't He ever heard of being first in line?

*\[Illustration]*  Back in the days when we ran our Can‑Do daycare, our fine teachers taught our preschoolers important life skills, like getting in line. If you weren't there to see it, you can still pretty well guess that "Who's first in line?" was an issue that our teachers had to deal with. Where do children ever get the idea *to even care* about who's first in line? … Does not the Bible say we're born with sin? And is not wanting to be first just wanting to make an idol of ourselves, pure and simple? And does not our Epistle lesson call it *selfish ambition*?
> **But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your hearts, do not boast and be false to the truth. This is not the wisdom that comes down from above, but is earthly, unspiritual, demonic. For where jealousy and selfish ambition exist, there will be disorder and every vile practice.**  (James 3:14–16)

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, we do have Jesus; He can save us yet again. With Advent just around the corner, ponder what we will soon be singing from the hymn *Savior of the Nations, Come* ( *LSB* 332):
> Here a maid was found with child,
> Yet remained a virgin mild.
> In her womb this truth was shown:
> God was there upon His throne.

Christ's name, we are told by the prophet Isaiah, is *Immanuel*: *God With Us*. Our first concrete experience of *God With Us* is at the conception of Jesus.
> **And \[Gabriel] answered \[Mary], "The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the child to be born will be called holy—the Son of God. And behold, your relative Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. For nothing will be impossible with God." And Mary said, "Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word." And the angel departed from her.**  (Luke 1:35–38)

At this point, I believe, Mary conceived right away. God had spoken, Mary had believed, and the Holy Spirit went right to work. In Mary's womb *God was on His throne*, hidden, but most certainly there. That's the style with which God chose to be with us, the manner of our Lord's authority: hidden, but most certainly there.

How does this manner of our Lord continue to be revealed to us? What is the manner of His authority, since He *is* true God? *\[Illustration]*  It may not be news to you, but there's a presidential campaign going on, and each candidate works very hard to be perceived as *presidential*—someone we would like to have in authority over us. Well, *our Lord's* campaign, His public ministry, begins *\[Baptism window]*  with His Baptism in the Jordan River. And this, at first, is hardly a huge production, but—if I must put it this way—Christ's Baptism in the Jordan is our Lord's first campaign rally. There are sinners lined up, confessing their sins, to be baptized by John—a pitiful sight, actually. And there is Christ in line with the sinners, hidden, but most certainly there. *Most certainly there*: see heaven open when Christ is baptized! The Holy Spirit descends on Him like a dove and the Father's voice is heard, **"You are My belovèd Son; with You I am well pleased"**  (Mark 1:9–11). But we see clearly the nature of Christ's being hidden: He is hiding among sinners—He is here to *serve us*.

At this point we do well to let the apostle teach us,
> **Do nothing from selfish ambition or conceit, but in humility count others more significant than yourselves. Let each of you look not only to his own interests, but also to the interests of others. Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, by taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form, he humbled himself by becoming obedient to the point of death, even death on a cross.**  (Phil. 2:3–8)

Do you want to see authority? *\[Crucifixion]*  Behold our Lord Jesus Christ, serving us **to the point of death, even death on a cross**. But, belovèd in the Lord, this is real authority. What about death? Christ's death, as pitiful as He seems, holds *supreme authority* over the one judgment over us all: death.

HE MUST BE LAST OF ALL AND SERVANT OF ALL, JUST LIKE JESUS. **For even the Son of Man came not to be served but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many** (Mark 10:45).

Jesus could have come as Creator, just to share His Creation with us, like a heavenly science teacher.
> **\[Jesus] awoke and rebuked the wind and said to the sea, "Peace! Be still!" And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.**  (Mark 4:39)

He could have come as our heavenly science teacher, but He chose to come instead, as our Servant.

Christ is at the back of the line, making sure the rest of the line gets to where it's supposed to. Christ, our servant, is our Good Shepherd.

Who's first in line? Is sure ain't Jesus.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Notes
Isaiah 42:1–4
\[1] Behold my servant, whom I uphold,
my chosen, in whom my soul delights;
I have put my Spirit upon him;
he will bring forth justice to the nations.
\[2] He will not cry aloud or lift up his voice,
or make it heard in the street;
\[3] a bruised reed he will not break,
and a faintly burning wick he will not quench;
he will faithfully bring forth justice.
\[4] He will not grow faint or be discouraged
till he has established justice in the earth;
and the coastlands wait for his law. (ESV)

Christ is called God's servant by the prophet Isaiah.

Jeremiah 10:5
\[5] Their idols are like scarecrows in a cucumber field,
and they cannot speak;
they have to be carried,
for they cannot walk.
Do not be afraid of them,
for they cannot do evil,
neither is it in them to do good.” (ESV)

The verses just before the OT lesson reveal that Judah worshiped Baal. **“Do not pray for this people.”** The OT lesson reveals the hatred of the idolaters toward Jeremiah, which is stated explicitly in v. 21.

In Jer. 13, the LORD commands Jeremiah to hide the loincloth in the cleft of a rock by the Euphrates.

Mark 10:46–47
\[46] And they came to Jericho. And as he was leaving Jericho with his disciples and a great crowd, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, the son of Timaeus, was sitting by the roadside. \[47] And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out and say, “Jesus, Son of David, have mercy on me!” (ESV)

Mark 10:47 is the Kyrie.
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |