---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: October 11, 2025
title: REMEMBERING THE OTHER SAMARITAN
occasion: 18th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Ruth 1:1-19a
  - 2 Tim. 2:1-13
  - Luke 17:11-19
sermon_text: Luke 17:11-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# REMEMBERING THE OTHER SAMARITAN

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Thank You, Lord Jesus, for all the blessings of body and soul that are ours in Your name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, let's remember our favorite Samaritans. Samaritan, Samaritan, who can name a Samaritan? There's
* the Good Samaritan, of course, of Luke, chapter 10,
* the Samaritan woman of John, chapter 4, and
* the Samaritan who returns to give thanks in today's Holy Gospel.

(This Samaritan who returns to give thanks always will reappear at the Thanksgiving Eve service.) *\[Ask]*  Have I forgotten any Samaritans? And I dare say that of all of these, the Good Samaritan is the most famous. The Good Samaritan is—well, the Good Samaritan is good. The Samaritan woman at the well—you'd have to say she's good, too. Our Samaritan leper who is healed and returns to give thanks—he's also good. We'll call him *the other Samaritan* for today—one Samaritan among many good Samaritans. Today we are REMEMBERING THE OTHER SAMARITAN.

We've named some Samaritans from the Bible. *\[Ask]*  So, are Samaritans good? … No, they're *bad*—really, really bad. The Samaritans have a long history of being bad, and if you're familiar with the Old Testament, you know *why* the Samaritans are bad. The Samaritans are bad because Jeroboam was a bad king. The Samaritans are bad because Ahab also was a bad king, and how can we forget how evil Jezebel was? The Samaritans are bad because the Assyrians were bad. It is not hard to tell from the Bible how bad the Samaritans are.

Let's start with the Assyrians. There is a strong connection between the Assyrians and the Samaritans—in fact, the Samaritans have Assyrian blood. The Assyrians were bad—back in the day—back in their heyday in Old Testament times, the Assyrians were the nation to be feared. They were the ones who brought in the army and conquered other nations before the Babylonians came and conquered them. The Assyrians, at the height of their power, would come to a city, offer to it kind treatment if it gave up and let them take over, but should the city refuse: off with their heads. The Assyrians were brutal to their enemies. (There's a fine museum in Chicago, by the way, the Oriental Institute, with Assyrian artifacts.) The capital of Assyria, Nineveh, was a massive city. It is to this very city that the Lord sent the prophet Jonah to preach (Jonah 1:2).

When it comes to the Assyrians, 722 B.C. was a big year. Back in 722 B.C., seven hundred years before Christ, the Assyrians attacked the kingdom of Israel and conquered it—they conquered Israel and its capital, Samaria. *Samaria* is where the name *Samaritans* comes from. The Assyrians conquered Samaria and from that time forward we have the people that came to be called *Samaritans* in the New Testament. (Call this a mini Bible study.) Remember that at that time the tribes of Israel were no longer one nation, but two:
* the northern kingdom of Israel with its capital, Samaria;
* the southern kingdom of Judah with it capital, Jerusalem, the holy city.

When the Assyrians conquered the northern kingdom, they conquered Samaria and the ten tribes of Israel with it—they conquered the ten tribes that lived up north: the tribes of Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Dan, Naphtali, Gad, Asher, Issachar, Zebulun, and Joseph. The conquerors left some of the Israelites there and sent the others to the far corners of the Assyrian empire; that's called *deportation*. The Assyrians replaced the Israelites they had deported with some of their own people—this is an effective way to conquer a nation and keep it under your control.

That left what had been the territory of kingdom of Israel half populated with Jews and half populated with Assyrians. These people mixed—they intermarried and they worshiped one another's gods. *\[Ask]*  But is this a good thing? No—this is a big no-no with the Lord because he cannot tolerate his people worshiping any god but Him alone (Deut. 7:3–4). For it is written in Isaiah, chapter 42, **"I am the LORD; that is My name; My glory I give to no other, nor My praise to carved idols"**  (Is. 42:8). This mixture of Assyrians and Jews came to be called *the Samaritans*, and they were bad because they worshiped idols—they mixed the worship of idols with the worship of the one true God of Israel—it's still idolatry.

But this was nothing new for the Samaritans—not for their Jewish side, anyway. For before the Assyrian conquest these ten tribes of Israel had previously been ruled by Ahab, whose wife was Jezebel. That brings up Baal—the Israelites had fallen for Baal long ago (1 Kings 16:31–33)—long before the Assyrians came to town. Need I say more? Well, there *is* more. Before Ahab and Jezebel the ten tribes of the northern kingdom had worshiped—do you remember?—they had worshiped the golden calves at Dan and Bethel—the Bible calls this *the sin of Jeroboam* (1 Kings 12:28–29). Need I say more? If you're familiar with the Old Testament, you know why the Samaritans were bad. They were bad *idolaters*—they did not worship the one true God of Israel—or they kept the God of Israel but had no problem worshiping a false god on the side. No wonder the Jews in the days of Jesus had no dealings with the Samaritans (John 4:9).

All this is to say that it is one *huge surprise* to hear Samaritans portrayed kindly in the New Testament. The Good Samaritan who showed mercy to the man who had been robbed, beaten, and left for dead (Luke 10:30) forever enshrines *Good* with *Samaritan*—not bad, good. The Samaritan woman at the well believed in Jesus, and went and told her friends and they believed in Him, too (John 4:39)—not bad, good. What we have in the New Testament are Samaritans believing Jesus to be the Messiah of the Jews; Samaritans, of all people, believing in Jesus, doing good, and showing mercy. For the Lord says, **"I desire mercy, not sacrifice"**  (Hos. 6:6; Matt. 9:13). The Samaritans have found mercy, but the Jews are stuck on sacrifice.

*\[Transition]*  And when it comes to sacrifice, belovèd in the Lord, we have *\[Crucifixion]*  the Cross. For the whole Bible testifies as St. Paul declares, **"I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and Him crucified"**  (1 Cor. 2:2) for our sins, for our idolatry. *\[Chancel]*  Having confessed our sin before God, we rejoice in the preaching of the Cross that declares that Christ's sacrifice has taken away the sin we have confessed—even the sin we are not aware of—even the sin we were born with—yes, even the sin of the world (John 1:29) is taken away by Christ at the Cross. His once-for-all sacrifice took care of it all—the shedding of His holy, precious blood on the Cross—is the fulfillment of the Old Testament animal sacrifices so that we hear in Hebrews, chapter 10, **"We have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all"**  (Heb. 10:10).

*\[Transition]*  But there remains a sacrifice for us Christians to keep, and it is the sacrifice or the other Samaritan. Today we are REMEMBERING THE OTHER SAMARITAN—the Samaritan leper who is healed in our Holy Gospel.
> **\[Jesus] was met by ten lepers, who stood at a distance and lifted up their voices, saying, "Jesus, Master, have mercy on us." When He saw them He said to them, "Go and show yourselves to the priests." And as they went they were cleansed. Then one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, praising God with a loud voice; and he fell on his face at Jesus’ feet, giving Him thanks. Now he was a Samaritan.**

The Jews who had been healed did not return to give thanks to Jesus, but the Samaritan did. The idols he once worshiped are useless—He falls on his face before Christ. This Samaritan is the one to teach us the sacrifice that we Christians are still invited make: the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. For the Lord declares in Psalm 50,
> **If I were hungry, I would not tell you, for the world and its fullness are mine. Do I eat the flesh of bulls or drink the blood of goats? Offer to God** ***a sacrifice of thanksgiving*, and perform your vows to the Most High, and call upon me in the day of trouble; I will deliver you, and you shall glorify me.**  (Ps. 50:12–15)

What we have from the other Samaritan today is simply that he made it a point to thank Jesus. Even today we Christians like to exclaim, "Thank You, Jesus!" We do so in the spirit of our good Samaritan in today's Holy Gospel. We have Jesus to thank for our salvation. We are not simply saved, we are saved *from death*. Now is a good time to point out Hebrews, chapter 2:
> **Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, \[Christ] Himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death He might** ***destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery*.**  (Heb. 2:14–15)

Belovèd in the Lord, we are freed by Christ from the fear of death and slavery to the devil. I'll leave it at that. By faith in Christ and by the grace of His Spirit, we are no longer afraid to die. Thank You, Jesus! We believe in Jesus, and we're not going back to our idols. But we will go back to Him and thank Him in all things. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
THE SACRIFICE OF THE SAMARITAN PLEASED GOD.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Ruth 1:15–17
\[15] And she said, “See, your sister-in-law has gone back to her people and to her gods; return after your sister-in-law.” \[16] But Ruth said, “Do not urge me to leave you or to return from following you. For where you go I will go, and where you lodge I will lodge. Your people shall be my people, and your God my God. \[17] Where you die I will die, and there will I be buried. May the LORD do so to me and more also if anything but death parts me from you.” (ESV)

Matthew 10:5–7
\[5] These twelve Jesus sent out, instructing them, “Go nowhere among the Gentiles and enter no town of the Samaritans, \[6] but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. \[7] And proclaim as you go, saying, ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’ (ESV)

Matthew 10:8
\[8] Heal the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, cast out demons. You received without paying; give without pay. (ESV)

2 Timothy 2:13
\[13] if we are faithless, he remains faithful—for he cannot deny himself. (ESV)

Sacrifice of praise/thanksgiving.

Psalm 50:7–15
\[7] “Hear, O my people, and I will speak;
O Israel, I will testify against you.
I am God, your God.
\[8] Not for your sacrifices do I rebuke you;
your burnt offerings are continually before me.
\[9] I will not accept a bull from your house
or goats from your folds.
\[10] For every beast of the forest is mine,
the cattle on a thousand hills.
\[11] I know all the birds of the hills,
and all that moves in the field is mine.


\[12] “If I were hungry, I would not tell you,
for the world and its fullness are mine.
\[13] Do I eat the flesh of bulls
or drink the blood of goats?
\[14] Offer to God a sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and perform your vows to the Most High,
\[15] and call upon me in the day of trouble;
I will deliver you, and you shall glorify me.” (ESV)

Job 1:21
\[21] And he said, “Naked I came from my mother’s womb, and naked shall I return. The LORD gave, and the LORD has taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD.” (ESV)

Hebrews 13:15
\[15] Through him then let us continually offer up a sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of lips that acknowledge his name. (ESV)