---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 27, 2024
title: LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING
occasion: Thanksgiving Eve
readings:
  - Deut. 8:1-10
  - 1 Tim. 2:1-4
  - Luke 17:11-19
sermon_text: Deut. 8:1-10
bible_version: ESV
---

# LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Holy Spirit, with enduring thankfulness for our salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, our Lord. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, tonight we take the opportunity to be reminded of the basic testimony of Scripture LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING. For our Lord Himself quotes our Old Testament lesson to Satan's face, **"It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone'"**  (Deut. 8:3; Luke 4:4). Our Lord Jesus is put in the extremely difficult situation of having to endure temptation at the hands of Satan while suffering extreme hunger at the same time, yet He clings to **every word that comes from the mouth of the LORD** in complete trust in His Father and without a single word of complaint.

The ones who *do* complain, the Bible tells us over and over again, are the Israelites in the wilderness. It is one of the basic testimonies of Scripture that Moses led the Israelites out of Egypt, through the wilderness for forty years, and then to the Promised Land. It is noteworthy that while God takes perfect care of the Israelites in the wilderness, they still complain—they complain *a lot*.

Did you hear the Old Testament lesson? **"\[The LORD] humbled you and let you hunger and fed you with manna, which you did not know, nor did your fathers know."**  There are over a million Israelites sojourning in the wilderness for forty years, where little or no food grows. They do hunger. *\[Ask]*  But does even one of them ever starve? No, not one. They are fed six days a week with *bread from heaven*, and on the sixth day they get a double portion so they can rest on the Sabbath, *and no one—not one—starves*. Thank You, Jesus! The LORD, the one true God of Israel, orders everything perfectly so that God's people are properly fed—a basic testimony of Scripture. And so, we will continue to cover these basic testimonies one after the other LEST *WE* QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING—thanksgiving even for hunger—that it remind us of all the times God does feed us.

**"He fed you with manna that He might make you know that man does not live by bread alone, but** ***man lives by every Word that comes from the mouth of the LORD*."**  And here, in the midst of the testimony of Scripture, is this particular Word of God that is heard from the lips of our Savior Jesus Christ while He Himself has hungered for forty days—He is hungry *and* He is being tested—He is in the crosshairs of the devil. And so, we are reminded by the Spirit of the temptation of our Lord in the wilderness LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING for having God's Word at all—for having in our Bible and with the Sacraments God's *living* Word—more precious than the daily bread with which He feeds us.

*\[Transition]*  And now it is time to hear the basic testimony of Scripture to be reminded of the times when the Israelites, for all the perfect care they receive at the hands of the LORD, and in spite of the fact that He has saved them from slavery in Egypt and is faithfully taking them to the land He has promised to them—in spite of all the blessings that have been showered upon them by Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—they still grumble—they complain against Moses and against God. How dare they! But they do dare and they quickly turn their back on the one true God who has saved them. God forbid we should ever do the same.

The worst case, of course, is the golden calf. In Deuteronomy, chapter 9, God brings to remembrance the golden calf—the idol of Egypt that, after all of the LORD's faithfulness and steadfast love to the Israelites—after all His acts of salvation—they nevertheless quickly lose their faith and make the golden calf and bow down and worship it—an abomination to the LORD.

Now the grumbling. Also, in Deuteronomy, chapter 9, God remembers the grumbling of the Israelites *which went on even after the golden calf*. **"At** ***Taberah*** **also, and at** ***Massah*** **and at** ***Kibroth-hattaavah*** **you provoked the LORD to wrath"**  (Deut. 9:22). Tonight's the night we remember them, one by one, LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING and fall into grumbling ourselves.

Concerning Taberah, we hear in Numbers, chapter 11 that the people complained of their misfortunes which kindled the anger of the Lord so that many were burned by fire.

Concerning Massah, we hear in Exodus, chapter 17 that the people quarreled with God over being thirsty. Moses struck the rock and the people got water to drink. But they had quarreled with God because they did not trust Him. When the Lord tests us it is always a bad idea to test Him back, except in tithing, of course (Mal. 3:10).

And concerning Kibroth-hattaavah, we hear again in Numbers, chapter 11 that the people craved quail. The LORD gave it to them and then struck them down with a great plague.

Remember Kibroth-hattaavah, remember Massah, remember Taberah—remember the basic testimony of Scripture LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING for all the blessing that are ours in Christ Jesus! Belovèd in the Lord, *we have Jesus*. Remember especially the basic testimony of Scripture that God, in spite of the grumbling and the idolatry of the Israelites, nevertheless chooses *not* to destroy the Israelites for the sake of His Name. Moses pleads with the LORD,
> **Remember your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Do not regard the stubbornness of this people, or their wickedness or their sin, lest the land from which you brought us say, "Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land that he promised them, and because he hated them, he has brought them out to put them to death in the wilderness." For they are your people and your heritage, whom you brought out by your great power and by your outstretched arm.**  (Deut. 9:27–29)

Belovèd in the Lord, the Lord *is* able to take *any* sinner, no matter how wicked, to heaven. This is how the God of Israel finally deals with us: He has had mercy on us sinners for the sake of His Name—He has had mercy on us for the sake of His Son Jesus. He has forgiven us our trespasses so that we are no longer recognized as sinners but as His holy, forgiven children, purchased for Himself by the blood of the Son of God, who has loved us and has given Himself for us (Gal. 2:20). This is exactly what the LORD, the true God of Israel does. For the sake of His own Name He bears patiently with our sin and *\[Cross]*  when we turn in faith to His Son bearing our sins for us, like the thief in the window looking up at Jesus, *we are forgiven everything*. We can do nothing but *be thankful all the time*, and especially when we are tested. Belovèd in the Lord, with Christ we are secure, no matter what test we have to endure. **"For I am sure that neither death nor life, nor angels nor rulers, nor things present nor things to come, nor powers, nor height nor depth, nor anything else in all creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord"**  (Rom. 8:38–39).

We will be tested to forget our Lord Jesus and grumble. But help us, Spirit, never to grumble LEST WE QUICKLY FORGET TO ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING to the God who saves us. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
WHEN WE ARE TESTED, LET US NOT QUARREL WITH GOD AS THE ISRAELITES DID, DENYING HIS SALVATION, BUT RATHER LET US ENDURE IN THANKSGIVING.
## Outline
### I. What did our Lord say when He had to endure tempation?
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Points from the OT reading.
* God tests our hearts by giving us a commandment and watching whether we listen or not.
* He humbles us that we may learn **that man does not live by bread alone, but man lives by every word that comes from the mouth of the LORD**.
* The Israelites' clothing never wore out nor did their feet swell.
* God disciplines His children.
* He is bringing His children to the Promised Land.


Deuteronomy 8:16
\[16] who fed you in the wilderness with manna that your fathers did not know, that he might humble you and test you, to do you good in the end. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 9:1–2
\[1] “Hear, O Israel: you are to cross over the Jordan today, to go in to dispossess nations greater and mightier than you, cities great and fortified up to heaven, \[2] a people great and tall, the sons of the Anakim, whom you know, and of whom you have heard it said, ‘Who can stand before the sons of Anak?’ (ESV)

Numbers 13:33
\[33] And there we saw the Nephilim (the sons of Anak, who come from the Nephilim), and we seemed to ourselves like grasshoppers, and so we seemed to them.” (ESV)

Deuteronomy 9:4–12
\[4] “Do not say in your heart, after the LORD your God has thrust them out before you, ‘It is because of my righteousness that the LORD has brought me in to possess this land,’ whereas it is because of the wickedness of these nations that the LORD is driving them out before you. \[5] Not because of your righteousness or the uprightness of your heart are you going in to possess their land, but because of the wickedness of these nations the LORD your God is driving them out from before you, and that he may confirm the word that the LORD swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
\[6] “Know, therefore, that the LORD your God is not giving you this good land to possess because of your righteousness, for you are a stubborn people. \[7] Remember and do not forget how you provoked the LORD your God to wrath in the wilderness. From the day you came out of the land of Egypt until you came to this place, you have been rebellious against the LORD. \[8] Even at Horeb you provoked the LORD to wrath, and the LORD was so angry with you that he was ready to destroy you. \[9] When I went up the mountain to receive the tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant that the LORD made with you, I remained on the mountain forty days and forty nights. I neither ate bread nor drank water. \[10] And the LORD gave me the two tablets of stone written with the finger of God, and on them were all the words that the LORD had spoken with you on the mountain out of the midst of the fire on the day of the assembly. \[11] And at the end of forty days and forty nights the LORD gave me the two tablets of stone, the tablets of the covenant. \[12] Then the LORD said to me, ‘Arise, go down quickly from here, for your people whom you have brought from Egypt have acted corruptly. They have turned aside quickly out of the way that I commanded them; they have made themselves a metal image.’ (ESV)

Deuteronomy 9:22
\[22] “At Taberah also, and at Massah and at Kibroth-hattaavah you provoked the LORD to wrath. (ESV)

Numbers 11:1–3
\[1] And the people complained in the hearing of the LORD about their misfortunes, and when the LORD heard it, his anger was kindled, and the fire of the LORD burned among them and consumed some outlying parts of the camp. \[2] Then the people cried out to Moses, and Moses prayed to the LORD, and the fire died down. \[3] So the name of that place was called Taberah, because the fire of the LORD burned among them. (ESV)

Exodus 17:1–7
\[1] All the congregation of the people of Israel moved on from the wilderness of Sin by stages, according to the commandment of the LORD, and camped at Rephidim, but there was no water for the people to drink. \[2] Therefore the people quarreled with Moses and said, “Give us water to drink.” And Moses said to them, “Why do you quarrel with me? Why do you test the LORD?” \[3] But the people thirsted there for water, and the people grumbled against Moses and said, “Why did you bring us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our livestock with thirst?” \[4] So Moses cried to the LORD, “What shall I do with this people? They are almost ready to stone me.” \[5] And the LORD said to Moses, “Pass on before the people, taking with you some of the elders of Israel, and take in your hand the staff with which you struck the Nile, and go. \[6] Behold, I will stand before you there on the rock at Horeb, and you shall strike the rock, and water shall come out of it, and the people will drink.” And Moses did so, in the sight of the elders of Israel. \[7] And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the quarreling of the people of Israel, and because they tested the LORD by saying, “Is the LORD among us or not?” (ESV)

Numbers 11:31–34
\[31] Then a wind from the LORD sprang up, and it brought quail from the sea and let them fall beside the camp, about a day’s journey on this side and a day’s journey on the other side, around the camp, and about two cubits above the ground. \[32] And the people rose all that day and all night and all the next day, and gathered the quail. Those who gathered least gathered ten homers. And they spread them out for themselves all around the camp. \[33] While the meat was yet between their teeth, before it was consumed, the anger of the LORD was kindled against the people, and the LORD struck down the people with a very great plague. \[34] Therefore the name of that place was called Kibroth-hattaavah, because there they buried the people who had the craving. (ESV)

Deuteronomy 9:27–29
\[27] Remember your servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Do not regard the stubbornness of this people, or their wickedness or their sin, \[28] lest the land from which you brought us say, “Because the LORD was not able to bring them into the land that he promised them, and because he hated them, he has brought them out to put them to death in the wilderness.” \[29] For they are your people and your heritage, whom you brought out by your great power and by your outstretched arm.’ (ESV)

1 Timothy 2:8
\[8] I desire then that in every place the men should pray, lifting holy hands without anger or quarreling; (ESV)

We will be tested to forget what has been promised us and all who believe in Jesus. We have a Promised Land: heaven!