---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: September 10, 2024
title: TREASURE JESUS, LACK NOTHING
occasion: 21st Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Amos 5:6-7, 10-15
  - Heb. 3:12-19
  - Mark 10:17-22
sermon_text: Mark 10:17-22
bible_version: ESV
---

# TREASURE JESUS, LACK NOTHING

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Holy Spirit, we pray, to treasure Jesus.Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, you may have been to the nail parlor and been pampered. Maybe you've been to the spa for some hot massage stone therapy. Was it nice? You came home relaxed, stress gone, and thought, "You know, I just might do that again." Pleasure—you know—"If it feels good I just might do that again."

There are some special words that have to do with pleasure. *\[Ask]*  Who is a hedonist? A hedonist is a person devoted to the pursuit of pleasure. "If it feels good I'm going to do it. If it tastes good I'm going to eat it. If there's pleasure out there, I'm going to experience it *and live*." And that is the thing about pleasure: when something pleases us we feel *alive*, *\[illustration]*  like … chocolate … whipped cream … on a fluffy pancake … with a strawberry on top. (Please don't run out of church and straight to the kitchen.)

But when it comes to pleasure, chocolate whipped cream serves as a fine example. *\[Ask]*  What might we reasonably expect after years of enjoying chocolate whipped *heavy* cream? A trip to the cardiologist, of course, and, God forbid, premature *death* from clogged arteries. There's the catch with pleasure. Please, if you will, connect the unfortunate circumstance of a little too much whipped cream with the well-known verse: **"The wages of sin is death"**  (Rom. 6:23a). There is plenty of earthly pleasure to be had that leads to death. This pattern, pleasure-death, planned and executed to perfection by the devil, is all too well-known to us: it makes us feel alive *before it kills us*.

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, there is also a different—*much* different—kind of pleasure—heavenly pleasure that leads to life with no risk—*no chance!* —of death. Think of that: real pleasure that cannot kill us, and it's not dark-chocolate sawdust, either—yuck! To approach such heavenly pleasure, for example, take our enemies who pursue us, like the scammers who call us so that they might rob us. Yes, each of us has enemies who mean to do us harm. The Spirit has written for us many psalms that speak of our enemies. In Psalm 7 it is written,
> **O LORD my God, in you do I take refuge;**
> **save me from all my pursuers and deliver me,**
> **lest like a lion they tear my soul apart,**
> **rending it in pieces, with none to deliver.**  (Ps. 7:1–2)

We do have enemies. In Psalm 28 it is written,
> **Do not drag me off with the wicked,**
> **with the workers of evil,**
> **who speak peace with their neighbors**
> **while evil is in their hearts.**
> **Give to them according to their work**
> **and according to the evil of their deeds;**
> **give to them according to the work of their hands;**
> **render them their due reward.**  (Ps. 28:3–4)

In the middle of dealing with the wicked who surround us—with those who speak peace to us while evil is in their hearts—*feel the relief*—the pure pleasure I'm talking about, found later in Psalm 28:
> **Blessed be the LORD!**
> **For he has heard the voice of my pleas for mercy.**
> **The LORD is my strength and my shield;**
> **in him my heart trusts,** ***and I am helped*;**
> **my heart exults,**
> **and with my song I give thanks to him.**  (Ps. 28:6–7)

How many times has the Lord protected us from those who would do us harm? How may times have the angels stepped in to deliver us? Has the Lord not even established the armed forces of the United States to protect our cities from being bombed? "Thank you, Lord Jesus, for protecting us from our enemies—dragged down and dragged to hell by those who speak deceitfully and execute the devil's murderous plans." That is pure pleasure: the relief—the relief of knowing that we have been kept safe in spite of our enemies. The Lord has done it for us. We prayed to Him and He has helped us. The relief, the joy—call it what you may—call it godly pleasure.

Let's move on from our two-bit enemies to the really, really big enemy that lurks in the shadows. *\[Ask]*  Who or what might this enemy be? You know, when I moved to Cleveland I was instructed that the answer to this question is the Pittsburgh Steelers, but the Bible teaches us that this really, really big enemy is *death*. Call it death, call it the devil, who means to kill us (John 8:44). Behold the enemy that pounces on each of us as we seek sinful pleasure—the enemy that, *\[Resurrection]*  by virtue of the Resurrection of our Savior Jesus Christ, is defeated. **"The last enemy to be destroyed is death"**  (1 Cor. 15:26).

Belovèd in the Lord, behold the person and work of Jesus Christ! Who is this Victor over our enemy? He is God, who had pity on our miserable estate and became one of us to shepherd the masses—anyone who would listen to Him and follow Him—to *live*—not die—to *live* forever.
> **My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.**  (John 10:27–28)


Not even the howling devil. Our heavenly pleasure is to be relieved—

* relieved from the burden of our sins, *\[Cross]*  which Christ bore in our place on the Cross;
* relieved from slavery to the devil, who tricks us to pursue sinful pleasures;
* and *\[Resurrection]*  utterly saved from death, our enemy. Alleluia!

The one who works for us our salvation and brings us this pleasure is our greatest treasure—our treasure without measure—heavenly wealth beyond all earthly wealth.

*\[Conclusion]*  And so it is with sadness that we hear of the rich young man in today's Holy Gospel. He turned His back on Jesus and walked back to his money. In many ways we should be happy for him: who would not want to be a fine, upstanding person with plenty of wealth?
> **Jesus said to \[the young man], "Why do you call me good? No one is good except God alone. You know the commandments: 'Do not murder, Do not commit adultery, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Do not defraud, Honor your father and mother.'" And he said to him, "Teacher, all these I have kept from my youth." And Jesus, looking at him, loved him, and said to him, "You lack one thing: go, sell all that you have and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me." Disheartened by the saying, he went away sorrowful, for he had great possessions.**

The rich young man did not recognize heavenly treasure, but, by the grace of the Spirit, we do. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Notes



## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |