---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 27, 2025
title: JUST AS HE IS RISEN FROM THE DEAD, THIS IS MOST CERTAINLY TRUE.
occasion: 2nd Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 5:12-32
  - Rev. 1:4-18
  - John 20:19-31
sermon_text: John 20:19-31
bible_version: ESV
---

# JUST AS HE IS RISEN FROM THE DEAD, THIS IS MOST CERTAINLY TRUE.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Grant us, gracious Father, Your Spirit to never doubt that Your Son was raised from the dead for us. Amen.

Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! When our resurrected Lord appeared to His disciples, they were hiding behind closed doors for fear of the Jews. However, Scripture is clear that they were not ignorant of Christ foretelling His Resurrection. For Christ Himself had told them beforehand,
> **"Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." The Jews then said, "It has taken forty-six years to build this temple, and will You raise it up in three days?" But \[Christ] was speaking about the temple of His body. When therefore He was raised from the dead, His disciples** ***remembered*** **that He had said this, and they believed the Scripture and the Word that Jesus had spoken.**  (John 2:19b–22)

The disciples were not ignorant—they had just *forgotten* Christ's Word as they were hiding in fear behind closed doors.

It happened to them and it can happen to us, that we forget Christ's Word. **"The sheep follow \[the Good Shepherd], for they know His voice"**  (John 10:4), but if we do not remember what He has said, whose voice do we then follow? Our Lord tells us, **"A stranger they will not follow, but they will flee from him, for they do not know the voice of strangers"**  (John 10:5). Very well. May the Spirit grant us wisdom to flee from Satan's lies, but if we do not remember our Good Shepherd's Word, we are, at best, in a precarious situation.

Belovèd in the Lord, perhaps the most important Word to us to remember is *\[Crucifixion]*  Christ's Word from the Cross: **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do"**  (Luke 23:34a). That is, of all the doubts that assail us, the most dangerous and the most satanic is to doubt that our sins are forgiven. It is dangerous to doubt that Christ removed our sins from us as far as the east is from the west (Ps. 103:12). It is demonic to doubt that Christ is both God and man who shed His holy, precious blood to atone for our sins. Satan will deceive us any way he can to make us doubt who Christ is and doubt what Christ declared to us from the Cross: **"It is finished"**  (John 19:30) Our forgivness is won—the work of our salvation is finished. *\[Ask]*  How many of us believe that Jesus died on the Cross for our sins? But how many of us believe that now that Christ has been punished, we still have a little punishment to bear to make everything work? We do not want to go there! That's Satan's lie! **"It is finished"**  means that Christ bore all the punishment and there are no leftovers for us. We may be disciplined, but the punishment that brought us peace was all on Christ.

Belovèd in the Lord, remember Christ's Word from the Cross and remember Isaiah's prophecy: **"Upon Him was the chastisement that brought us** ***peace*, and with his wounds we are healed"**  (Is. 53:5b). Christ repeats this declaration of peace to His fearful disciples:
> **"Peace be with you. … Peace be with you. As the Father has sent me, even so I am sending you." And when He had said this, He breathed on them and said to them, "Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you withhold forgiveness from any, it is withheld."**  (John 20:19b, 21–23)

And then, one more time, eight days later, to doubting Thomas, our Lord again declares, **"Peace be with you"**  (John 20:26b). Christ never tires of telling us **"Peace be with you."**

Belovèd in the Lord, what kind of peace is this? Isaiah's prophecy plainly declares what kind of peace Christ won for us: it is the peace worked by Christ being pierced for our transgressions, crushed for our iniquities—it is the peace that comes when sin is punished and justice is served—it is the peace won for us by the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world (John 1:29). It is such a peace that God the Father no longer harbors any anger toward our sin. *Christ has carried our sin away; the Father is no longer angry at us; we are at peace with God.*  This is the peace that Christ declares and this is the peace for which God the Holy Spirit is given to us so that *we ourselves* may declare this peace to others.

The certainty of this peace is that Christ died on the Cross, but Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!
* Our Lord's Resurrection proves that death is not the last word for Christ—it is not the last word for Christ and it is not the last word for anyone who believes in Him.
* The wages of sin is death (Rom. 6:23) and our Lord's Resurrection proves that there is no trace of our sins remaining on the One who bore them all—no trace of sin on Christ *and* no trace of sin on anyone who believes in Him.
* Our Lord's Resurrection proves that all is won for Christ's cause, which is why we say, "JUST AS HE IS RISEN FROM THE DEAD, THIS IS MOST CERTAINLY TRUE."
    * This is most certainly true that our sins are washed away by the blood of Jesus and our Baptism.
    * This is most certainly true that death is defeated.
    * This is most certainly true that the devil is overthrown.
    * And this is most certainly true that the gates of heaven are open for anyone who believes in Him.

**"These are written so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing you may have life in his name."**  Belovèd in the Lord, there is no room for doubt. If you have never been to private Confession and Absolution, let me share with you my favorite part. My ears hear with joy these words from the lips of my Confessor: "Do you believe that my forgiveness is God's forgiveness."

"Yes."

"Let it be done for you *as you believe*. In the stead and by the command of my Lord Jesus Christ I forgive you all your sins in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit."

And I relax as I feel that peace. By faith in the Word of forgiveness in Christ's name you and I have that peace which Christ so often declares.

Belovèd in the Lord, you heard it, though: Christ's command and authority to forgive repentant sinners is given for us to declare to others in today's Holy Gospel: **"Receive the Holy Spirit. If you forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them; if you withhold forgiveness from any, it is withheld."**  Of course, we are to withhold forgiveness from the unrepentant, and God grant us wisdom to discern this properly. But it is our joy to forgive, and Christ has given us authority to declare to the repentant: "The peace won by Christ be with you." And it is done as the penitent believes.

*\[Transition]*  But what if we forget? God forbid that we forget! But if we do forget about the forgiveness Christ won for us, we will probably be afraid, like the disciples. God forbid, but if we are uncertain in any way about the salvation He won for us, we are in a precarious position. If we have trouble remembering, however, we have each other. I have no better example than our belovèd sister Arline—now at home with the Lord but who was losing her memory here on earth. On one of my visits I entered her room. (She sometimes thought I was Pastor Kurth, by the way. So, Pastor, you visited Arline more than you know.) She was sitting quietly, and we exchanged only a few words.

She sat quietly for a while and then asked me, "Am I baptized?"

"Yes, Arline, I know beyond a shadow of a doubt that you are baptized."

"Oh, that's good."

That was it. I may have prayed the Lord's Prayer with her as well, but then I left. It was a short visit but faith was restored by a simple reminder. Arline had no doubt that Christ had washed her sins away and saved her, JUST AS HE IS RISEN FROM THE DEAD, THIS IS MOST CERTAINLY TRUE.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes