---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 12, 2026
title: WE REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY
occasion: 2nd Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 5:29-42
  - Ps. 148
  - 1 Pet. 1:3-9
  - John 20:19-31
sermon_text: Ps. 148
bible_version: ESV
---

# WE REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We rejoice, gracious Father, in the name of Jesus, Your Son, who is risen from the dead. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, who were the apostles? There is a list of twelve apostles given in Matthew, chapter 10; in Mark, chapter 3; and in Luke, chapter 6. One of the apostles listed, Judas Iscariot, betrayed our Lord Jesus (Luke 22:47–48) — Satan entered into Judas (Luke 22:3) — he betrayed our Lord and then he tragically died in his sins (John 8:24; Matt. 27:5; Acts 1:18) — he died despairing, believing that Jesus was *not* able to bear his sin.

But, belovèd in the Lord, Jesus is God, and, as we heard on Palm Sunday, He *is* able to bear our sin, no matter how great our sin may be, for **nothing will be impossible with God** (Luke 1:37). What is impossible for man has been done by God, *\[Crucifixion]* who bore our sins on the Cross. What is impossible for God, however, is that He die, but Christ is also man, so that He was able to die. And He did die, crushed by the weight of our sin. The outcome of His death — the outcome of the death of the God-man Jesus Christ is that *\[Resurrection]*  Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! That Christ is risen is the wonderful outcome of His death — wonderful for Him and wonderful for us.
> **O death, where is your victory? O death, where is your sting?**  (1 Cor. 15:55)

For there is no question that Jesus bore our sin victoriously and, as the apostle Paul writes in Romans, chapter 6, He was raised for our justification (Rom. 4:25). By faith in Christ the burden or our sin is lifted and we stand innocent before God. Alleluia!

Which brings us back to the apostles. St. Paul was an apostle, but not yet at the time of our first reading, in Acts, chapter 5. (We turn our attention to today's first reading.) Our first reading reports the activity of the apostles after Christ's Resurrection and Ascension; not long after Pentecost. It is written,
> **Many signs and wonders were regularly done among the people by the hands of the apostles. And they were all together in Solomon's Portico**\[, that is, in the temple in Jerusalem] **. None of the rest dared join them, but the people held them in high esteem. And more than ever believers were added to the Lord, multitudes of both men and women.**  (Acts 5:12–14)

Signs and wonders are being performed at the hands of the apostles — apparently at the hands of all twelve apostles. At this time the apostles are those listed in Acts, chapter 1 and in the bulletin art. *\[Direct to look at the bulletin art]*  We have
* Peter and John
* James and Andrew

In the top row we have two pairs of brothers: Peter and Andrew are brothers, and John and James are also brothers, the sons of Zebedee, which is mentioned in the tiny print under the names in the bulletin art. This apostle John wrote the Gospel of John. His brother is also known as James the Great. *\[Ask]*  And do you recall what these four apostles have in common? … These two pairs of brothers, the apostles listed on the top row, are all fishermen (Matt. 4:18–19).

In the middle row we have
* Philip and Thomas
* Bartholomew and Matthew

The apostle Matthew wrote the Gospel of Matthew. Doubting Thomas is made famous in today's Holy Gospel, which was written by inspiration of the Spirit by the apostle John.

In the bottom row we have
* James and Simon the Canaanite

Simon the Canaanite is also known as Simon the Zealot; this other James is also known as James the son of Alphaeus and he is also known as James the Less. We also have in the bottom row
* Thaddeus and Matthias

Matthias is the apostle who has taken the place of Judas Iscariot; he was nominated and then chosen by lot to be an apostle (Acts 1:26). Thaddeus is also known as Judas — not Iscariot, but Judas the son of James. This rounds out the twelve apostles who are in the temple in Acts, chapter 5.
> **\[The people] even carried out the sick into the streets and laid them on cots and mats, that as Peter came by at least his shadow might fall on some of them. \[They] also gathered from the towns around Jerusalem, bringing the sick and those afflicted with unclean spirits, and they were all healed.**  (Acts 5:15–16)

Healing and casting out demons was done by Jesus. Now healing and casting out demons is done by the apostles in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead. It is one thing to do something wonderful. The apostles are healing and casting out demons. But, belovèd in the Lord, it is another thing to do something wonderful *in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead.*  **"The high priest rose up, and all who were with him (that is, the party of the Sadducees), and filled with jealousy they** ***arrested*** **the apostles and put them in the public prison"**  (Acts 5:17–18).

Belovèd in the Lord, today's sermon is that WE REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY — WE REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY not only to be saved from sin, death, and hell in the name of Jesus, but we WE REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY to encounter any kind of trouble in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead. In other words, WE REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY to bear the cross that Jesus has promised us. Today, we have the example of Peter and John, James and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James and Simon the Canaanite, and Thaddeus and Matthias. They healed and cast out demons in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead, and they were … locked up together in prison.
> **But during the night an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors and brought them out, and said, "Go and stand in the temple and speak to the people all the words of this Life." And when they heard this, they entered the temple at daybreak and began to teach.**  (Acts 5:19–21a)

This is the direction that we Christians receive over and over again in the Bible: brush yourself off and get back to what you were doing in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead. The apostles receive this direction. The prophet Elijah received this direction (1 Ki. 19:15). And remember the testimony of Job:
> **For I know that my Redeemer lives, and at the last He will stand upon the earth. And after my skin has been thus destroyed, yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for myself, and my eyes shall behold, and not another. My heart faints within me!**  (Job 19:25–27)

Job appeared to know about Jesus rising from the dead and confessed his faith in Jesus that when his own suffering is over, his — that is Job's — flesh will rise again and he will see Jesus with his own eyes. Our hearts yearn for this day also, and we return to what we are doing in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead.

From our first reading today we are able to answer the question: were the apostles happy or sad after being imprisoned and beaten for the name of Jesus?
> **When they had called in the apostles, they beat them and charged them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go. Then they left the presence of the council,** ***rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the name \[of Jesus]*** **. And every day, in the temple and from house to house, they did not cease teaching and preaching that the Christ is Jesus.**  (Acts 5:40–42)

Belovèd in the Lord, our psalm for today is
> **Praise the LORD! Praise the LORD from the heavens; praise Him in the heights! Praise Him, all His angels; praise Him, all his osts!**

This is a good one to pray when we suffer for the name of Jesus. By the grace of the Holy Spirit, may we remember the apostles, who rejoice that they are counted worthy to suffer dishonor for the name of Jesus. And may WE also REJOICE THAT WE ARE COUNTED WORTHY to suffer any hardship in the name of Jesus, who is risen from the dead. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes