---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: August 24, 2025
title: WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT
occasion: Feast of St. Bartholomew
readings:
  - Prov. 3:1-8
  - 2 Cor. 4:7-10
  - John 1:43-51
sermon_text: John 1:43-51
bible_version: ESV
---

# WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Lord Jesus, grant us Your Spirit that our faith in You not waver. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, what would language be without idiom? A lot less fun, for idiom is an interesting way in which we express ourselves. What would English be if no one said *I'll bet your bottom dollar*? What if no one was ever *under the weather*? What if there were no *three strikes and you're out*? Today, I offer to your consideration the expression *WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT*. We'll take this expression, *WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT*, in conjunction with the occasion we have today, as today, August 24, is the feast day of St. Bartholomew.

It bears repeating that these feast days, festivals, and commemorations are listed in the hymnal but we are *not* commanded by God's Word to keep them. During the Reformation, the goal was to reform only that which *had to be* brought in line with the Bible—Scripture alone. For example, it is expressly stated in 1 Timothy, chapter 4 that to forbid someone to marry is a doctrine of demons (1 Tim. 4:1–3). So, to forbid priests to marry is a doctrine of demons that had to be brought in line with the Bible. And it was, during the Reformation. Our pastors are allowed to be married men (1 Tim. 3:2). It's in the Bible.

However, one thing the Bible does *not* command *or forbid* is the observation of these feasts, festivals, and commemorations. What are we to do with them? By the time the Reformation came along, observance of saints' days was well-established among Christians. The people really followed these saints. The saints were not only remembered, but they were invoked in prayer, which Scripture does *not* teach. The saints were also used for naming children, for example, Martin Luther was born on November 10 and *\[font]*  baptized the very next day, November 11, on … none other than *St. Martin's Day*. That's how Luther's parents chose his name. Not only were children named after saints, not only were the saints prayed to, but their relics—pieces of their bodies, or what was believed to be pieces of their bodies, were objects of a large tourist industry. People made pilgrimages to visit the relics of the saints, which were believed, and are still believed by many today, to perform miracles, much like the bones of the prophet Elisha brought a man back to life, which is, in fact, in the Bible (2 Ki. 13:21).

Now is a good time to bring up the saints' days not only because today is St. Bartholomew's Day, but because our Epistle lessons for the last two Sundays covered Hebrews, chapter 11. And now we'll hear parts of Hebrews 11 one more time.
> **Faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen. For by it the people of old received their commendation. …** ***By faith*** **Abel offered to God a more acceptable sacrifice than Cain, through which he was commended as righteous, God commending him by accepting his gifts. And through his faith, though he died, he still speaks.** ***By faith*** **Enoch was taken up so that he should not see death, and he was not found, because God had taken him. Now before he was taken he was commended as having pleased God. And without faith it is impossible to please him, for whoever would draw near to God must believe that he exists and that he rewards those who seek him. …** ***By faith*** **Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises was in the act of offering up his only son, of whom it was said, "Through Isaac shall your offspring be named." \[Abraham] considered that God was able even to raise \[Isaac] from the dead, from which, figuratively speaking, he did receive him back. …** ***By faith*** **Moses, when he was grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, choosing rather to be mistreated with the people of God than to enjoy the fleeting pleasures of sin. He considered the reproach of Christ greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he was looking to the reward.** ***By faith*** **he left Egypt, not being afraid of the anger of the king, for he endured as seeing him who is invisible.** ***By faith*** **\[Moses] kept the Passover and sprinkled the blood, so that the Destroyer of the firstborn might not touch them.** ***By faith*** **the people crossed the Red Sea as on dry land, but the Egyptians, when they attempted to do the same, were drowned.** (Heb. 11:1–2, 4–6, 17–19, 24–29)

Hebrews 11 is the biblical way to remember the saints. Note that ***by faith the people crossed the Red Sea***—that's the whole nation of Israel. Furthermore, the Bible also teaches that *all* Christians are saints (Rom. 1:7). So, if you're going to have a church calendar at all, why not remember *every* Christian? Well, we do that. *\[Ask]*  Do you happen to know on which day of the church calendar we remember *every* Christian? All Saints' Day—we remember every Christian on November 1. So, to put it briefly, we remember the saints on special days, we even remember all Christians, in the spirit of Hebrews 11. We remember what has been done before us by faith in the name of Jesus Christ, our God and Lord.

Now, going back to Bartholomew, he was … one of the twelve apostles. "I didn't know that." Look it up. It is my goal today to relate to you what a wonderful apostle Bartholomew was. "WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT." He's first mentioned by name in Matthew, chapter 10:
> **The names of the twelve apostles are these: first, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother; James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother; Philip and** ***Bartholomew*;** (See, I told you Bartholomew was an apostle.)  **Thomas and Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot, and Judas Iscariot, who betrayed \[Jesus].**  (Matt. 10:2–4)

There are three other places in the Bible where Bartholomew is mentioned by name, and all three are, just like Matthew 10, an official list of the twelve apostles. We have nothing of what *specifically Bartholomew* said or did in the Bible—we know for sure that he's one of the twelve. That's it. "WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT."

The idiom *WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT* is an expression of righteousness. "You think you're right, but WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT. In the end, you may think differently." All that is packaged in the words *WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT*, and at their core, is an appeal to reveal who's right and who's wrong.

Now, *\[Resurrection]*  when Christ rose from the dead, He appeared to His disciples.
> **Jesus revealed Himself again to the disciples by the Sea of Tiberias, and he revealed Himself in this way. Simon Peter, Thomas (called the Twin), Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together.**  (John 21:1–2)

Does the word *disciples* here mean *apostles*? For Peter, Thomas, and the sons of Zebedee are all bona fide apostles. Is Nathanael also an apostle or is he a believer in Jesus who is not an apostle? In John, chapter 21 Nathanael is listed together with apostles. This is where some have argued that Nathanael is an apostle, and that He is known elsewhere as Bartholomew. Take it or leave it. Many believe this to be true, that Bartholomew the apostle is Nathanael, who appears twice by name in the the Gospel of John.

So, what are we to believe about the life of the apostle Bartholomew? First of all, he believed that *\[Crucifixion]*  was crucified bearing his sins and was *\[Resurrection]*  raised from the dead for his justification (Rom. 4:25)—making Bartholomew righteous before God. "WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT." Bartholomew believed in Jesus just like you and I do: He is the One True God who became flesh to be crucified to propitiate for our sins and defeat death, rising from the dead on the third day.

Since there is so little known directly about Bartholomew in the Bible, we turn to *extra-biblical* sources—sources that are not the Bible, so we cannot be sure if they are true or not. One extra-biblical source to which I will now refer was written during the the Reformation not in Germany, but in *England*. Once Bibles were printed in English and found in English households, it is said that the next book of prominence was *Foxe's Book of Martyrs*. *\[Ask]*  Has anyone ever heard of this book? It was written by John Foxe, who was Oxford-educated, and is believed to have researched his book carefully.

*Foxe's Book of Martyrs* reports,
> \[Bartholomew] preached in several countries, and having translated the Gospel of Matthew into the language of India, he propagated it in that country. He was at length cruelly beaten and then crucified by the impatient idolaters.

That's it. Foxe also reports the following about the apostle John:
> The "beloved disciple," was brother to James the Great. The churches of Smyrna, Pergamos, Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, and Thyatira, were founded by him. From Ephesus he was ordered to be sent to Rome, where it is affirmed he was cast into a cauldron of boiling oil. He escaped by miracle, without injury. Domitian afterwards banished him to the Isle of Patmos, where he wrote the Book of Revelation. Nerva, the successor of Domitian, recalled him. *He was the only apostle who escaped a violent death.*

According to *Foxe's Book of Martyrs*, I tend to believe that the apostles, with the exception of John, were martyred—especially that idolaters put the apostles of the true God to death. Jezebel would have done it to Elijah-it makes perfect scriptural sense. Also, Hebrews 11 declares,
> **Women received back their dead by resurrection. Some were tortured, refusing to accept release, so that they might rise again to a better life. Others suffered mocking and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn in two, they were killed with the sword. They went about in skins of sheep and goats, destitute, afflicted, mistreated—of whom the world was not worthy—wandering about in deserts and mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth. And all these, though commended through their faith, did not receive what was promised, since God had provided something better for us, that apart from us they should not be made perfect.**  (Heb. 11:35–40)

What this means is that I believe that Bartholomew was indeed martyred for preaching the forgiveness of sins by *\[Crucifixion]*  the Cross of Jesus.
> *To that old rugged cross I will ever be true;*
> *Its shame and reproach gladly bear.*
> *Then He'll call me some day to my home far away,*
> *Where His glory forever I’ll share.*

I also believe that the circumstances of Bartholomew's death were much like those of the other apostles: idolaters heard their preaching and then wanted to kill them because they would not accept their idols as being anything but worthless (Jonah 2:8). Father, Son, and Holy Spirit is the One True God (Matt. 28:19); anything else is a worthless idol. The prophets rebuked worthless idols and those who worshiped them (Is. 44:9), and so did the apostles (1 John 5:21). And for this, they paid with their lives, with the idolaters who put them to death grinning and saying, "WE'LL SEE ABOUT THAT."

*\[Conclusion]*  And so, when Christ, our God, returns to judge the living and the dead, those who believe in him will enter the heavenly Jerusalem. And we are told in the book of Revelation some of the details of New Jerusalem. St. John writes
> **\[The angel] carried me away in the Spirit to a great, high mountain, and showed me the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God, its radiance like a most rare jewel, like a jasper, clear as crystal. It had a great, high wall, with twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and on the gates the names of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel were inscribed—on the east three gates, on the north three gates, on the south three gates, and on the west three gates.** ***And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them were the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb***_._  (Rev. 21:10–14)

There, on the foundation, we will again the the name *Bartholomew*. And we'll see who the True God is. He is Christ, who with the Father and the Spirit is the One True God, now and forever. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Luke 22:24–30 is the alternate Holy Gospel.
\[24] A dispute also arose among them, as to which of them was to be regarded as the greatest. \[25] And he said to them, “The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and those in authority over them are called benefactors. \[26] But not so with you. Rather, let the greatest among you become as the youngest, and the leader as one who serves. \[27] For who is the greater, one who reclines at table or one who serves? Is it not the one who reclines at table? But I am among you as the one who serves.
\[28] “You are those who have stayed with me in my trials, \[29] and I assign to you, as my Father assigned to me, a kingdom, \[30] that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel. (ESV)

Bartholomew is listed my name only among the lists of the apostles:
* Matt. 10:3
* Mark 3:18
* Luke 6:14
* Acts 1:13

Then again, he may be Nathanael. According to [Britannica](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Saint-Bartholomew), "a 9th-century tradition identified \[Bartholomew] with Nathanael."

Bartholomew's name is written in the book of life.