---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 31, 2024
title: THE LIFE WAS MADE MANIFEST, AND WE HAVE SEEN IT.
occasion: New Year's Eve
readings:
  - Ps. 23
  - 1 John 1:1-10
sermon_text: 1 John 1:1-10
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE LIFE WAS MADE MANIFEST, AND WE HAVE SEEN IT.
Belovèd in the Lord, **"The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want. …"**  These are among the best-known words in the English language. It is noteworthy that this psalm has persisted in the King James Version along with the Lord's Prayer—**"Our Father, Who art in heaven, …"**  *\[Illustration]*  Since we are here to celebrate New Year's Eve, I wish to take up the the tradition of America's Top 100–yes, Casey Kasem on the radio on New Year's Eve—remember?—were any of you listening to the Top 100 with me on New Year's Eve in 1975? I now present to you Pastor Pirn's Top *Three* Passages of the English Language. (One thing Pastor Renner and I do a lot of is talk to people in English.) So here are my top three *in popularity*—I submit to you this list purely from popularity—people know these passages, and from talking to a lot of people, young and old, I believe these are the top three most popular passages.
* \#3 *Silent Night*
* \#2 Psalm 23
* \#1 The Lord's Prayer

These passages, I believe, are still better known than any secular song or poem. For example, the top song in 1975 was *Love Will Keep Us Together*—a great song, but nowhere as popular as these top three.

*Silent Night* we sang just a week ago to celebrate our Savior's birth—*round yon virgin mother and child, holy Infant so tender and mild, sleep in heavenly peace! sleep in heavenly peace!*  Then we have Psalm 23. I will likely continue to pray Psalm 23 in the King James, and here's why. *\[Illustration]*  One day I was wearing my clerical at Metro and I was up there in the towers—which floor, I can't remember. I went to the waiting room and there was a family who saw my collar and invited me to come and pray with them for their loved one. I could have prayed the Lord's Prayer with them—I was sure they'd know that. But I took a gamble on Psalm 23, and, without batting an eye, we prayed Psalm 23 in the King James in unison. Then we have the Lord's Prayer—everyone knows it, and I thank AA and NA for teaching it to many who need it and otherwise would not pray to their Father in heaven. These top three are wonderful because the Holy Spirit proclaims the truth—proclaims life through Christ our Savior through these passages.

*\[Transition]*  But there's a threat—a serious threat to break into the top three. The threat the maelstrom of passages and images swirling in our electronic devices trying to suck us in. We cannot ignore that St. John warns us in 1 John, chapter 5: **"the whole world lies in the power of the evil one"**  (1 John 5:19b), and there will be more of that on 2025. *\[Illustration]*  Case in point—and, Pastor Renner, you may have observed this, too—I have on more than one occasion visited a parishioner in need of spiritual care. Why? Because she has been watching the news all day long. Watching the news all day may let in a bit too much of the devil's message and can be dangerous. For the devil is a liar and the father of lies (John 8:44b). Then there are the phones. The devil has been tremendously successful promoting pornography, for example, through so-called "smartphones" so that knowledge is fading—knowledge of marriage—knowledge of man and woman created in the image of God. God forbid that knowledge of His creation fade in our hearts and minds!

*\[Transition; slowly]*  **"What is truth?"**  Pilate asked as He looked straight at our Lord Jesus Christ (John 18:38). Let us take up the issue of truth today so that we would know what or Who to cling to *so that we know the truth and so that we live*. We all want to live in 2025. We want to live, and bringing to remembrance what our Lord has warned us about concerning the devil, take note that when the devil lies, his goal is to kill.
> **\[The devil] was** ***a murderer from the beginning*, and does not stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he lies, he speaks out of his own character, for** ***he is a liar and the father of lies*.**  (John 8:44b)

Lies and murder are not separate—lies and murder are the devil's package. And I will add this stern verse from our reading in 1 John, chapter 1: **"If we say we have not sinned, we make \[God] a liar, and His Word is not in us."**  *\[Pray]*  Lord God, heavenly Father, we *do* confess to You that we have sinned against You in thought, word, and deed, by what we have done and by what we have left undone.

*\[Transition]*  Belovèd in the Lord, upon this your confession, I proclaim truth and life to you in the name of Jesus Christ! For truth and life are *Christ's* package—truth and life always go together and that life is guaranteed for us by the forgiveness of sin in Jesus' Name. And it is not only I that proclaim this Good News to you, but so does the apostle John in our reading: **"That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon** ***and have touched with our hands*, concerning** ***the Word of Life*."**  Now there's a Word to cling to: the Word of Life. Yet this Word of Life is a person—the person of Jesus Christ. Pontius Pilate spoke with Him face-to-face. The apostles have seen Him with their eyes and have touched Him with their hands. St. John especially draws our attention *to the wound in His side*, the wound from His Crucifixion, still visible after His Resurrection from the dead. This is His wound by which water and blood poured out (John 19:34). John writes,
> **This is He who came by water and blood—Jesus Christ; not by the water only but by the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the one who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth. For there are three that testify: the Spirit and the water and the blood; and these three agree.**  (1 John 5:6–8)

As our Lord came in our flesh to save us, He has borne our sins by bearing for us in His body the death we deserve on account our sins. These are the sins we have confessed. These are also the sins—God forbid!—we have yet to commit. These are our sins and our Lord has borne each and every one of them for us. He was pierces for our transgressions and out came the water and the blood. We still need Him now to come to us with constant forgiveness for the sins we commit today and we need Him to come to us with the constant reminder that what has already been confessed and forgiven is *truly forgiven*. We need Him every day.

St. John tells us that He still comes to us *\[font]*  by the water and *\[altar]*  by the blood. And our ascended Lord has also given us His Spirit, who *is* the truth, to remind us of everything He has said (John 14:26). And so, belovèd in the Lord, I submit to you a new top three for 2025: the Top Three Most Important for Truth and Life in Jesus' Name in 2025, in no particular order because these three agree:
* The Spirit—who is the truth and brings to our remembrance all the life-giving Word that Christ has spoken, and I would commend to you not only the Gospels but also Genesis to Revelation.
* The Water—remembrance of our Baptism by which we were marked as those redeemed by Christ crucified, and by which we received the Spirit of Truth.
* The Blood—regular participation in Holy Communion, where together we receive life itself—Christ's true lifeblood on our lips for the forgiveness of our sins.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Readings
Ps. 23

1 John 1
\[1] That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, which we looked upon and have touched with our hands, concerning the word of life—\[2] the life was made manifest, and we have seen it, and testify to it and proclaim to you the eternal life, which was with the Father and was made manifest to us—\[3] that which we have seen and heard we proclaim also to you, so that you too may have fellowship with us; and indeed our fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ. \[4] And we are writing these things so that our joy may be complete.
\[5] This is the message we have heard from him and proclaim to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. \[6] If we say we have fellowship with him while we walk in darkness, we lie and do not practice the truth. \[7] But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from all sin. \[8] If we say we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us. \[9] If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. \[10] If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us. (ESV)
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Turns out that the second reading was *John* 1:1–18, not *1 John* 1:1–10. I had been texted John, but I didn't read it carefully enough and preached on 1 John.

Isaiah 30:8–17
\[8] And now, go, write it before them on a tablet
and inscribe it in a book,
that it may be for the time to come
as a witness forever.
\[9] For they are a rebellious people,
lying children,
children unwilling to hear
the instruction of the LORD;
\[10] who say to the seers, “Do not see,”
and to the prophets, “Do not prophesy to us what is right;
speak to us smooth things,
prophesy illusions,
\[11] leave the way, turn aside from the path,
let us hear no more about the Holy One of Israel.”
\[12] Therefore thus says the Holy One of Israel,
“Because you despise this word
and trust in oppression and perverseness
and rely on them,
\[13] therefore this iniquity shall be to you
like a breach in a high wall, bulging out and about to collapse,
whose breaking comes suddenly, in an instant;
\[14] and its breaking is like that of a potter’s vessel
that is smashed so ruthlessly
that among its fragments not a shard is found
with which to take fire from the hearth,
or to dip up water out of the cistern.”


\[15] For thus said the Lord GOD, the Holy One of Israel,
“In returning and rest you shall be saved;
in quietness and in trust shall be your strength.”
But you were unwilling, \[16] and you said,
“No! We will flee upon horses”;
therefore you shall flee away;
and, “We will ride upon swift steeds”;
therefore your pursuers shall be swift.
\[17] A thousand shall flee at the threat of one;
at the threat of five you shall flee,
till you are left
like a flagstaff on the top of a mountain,
like a signal on a hill. (ESV)

But now I want to give you the top 66 *in importance*.
* Genesis
* Exodus
* Leviticus *\[do them all]*  …
* Amos
* Obadiah—forget about the ball dropping and read Obadiah
* Jonah …
* Revelation