---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 31, 2025
title: GREAT ARE THE WORKS OF THE LORD
occasion: New Year's Eve
readings:
  - Is. 63:7-14
  - Ps. 111
  - Gal. 4:4-7
  - Matt. 2:13-23
sermon_text: Ps. 111
bible_version: ESV
---

# GREAT ARE THE WORKS OF THE LORD
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Help us, gracious Father, to pray as You have taught us, in the name of Your Son, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, *prayer is important*. It was important this year and it will be important again in 2026. Our Lord teaches us the Lord's Prayer both in Matthew's Gospel (Matt. 6) and in Luke's Gospel (Luke 11). Take note that in both accounts our Lord begins His instruction with these words: **"When you pray"**  — not " *If* you pray" — **"**  ***When*** **you pray."**  This point is taken up in the confession of our church, in the Large Catechism.
> Prayer is just as strictly and seriously commanded as all other commandments: to have no other God, not to kill, not to steal, and so on. Let no one think that it makes no difference whether he prays or not. Common people think this, who grope in such delusion and ask, "Why should I pray? Who knows whether God heeds or will hear my prayer? If I do not pray, someone else will." And so they fall into the habit of never praying. *They build a false argument*, as though we taught that there is no duty or need for prayer, because we reject false and hypocritical prayers (LC 3, 6).

Take note that only a *false* argument can ever lead us *not* to pray. Nevertheless, the warning about false and hypocritical prayers is valid, as our Lord teaches,
> ***When you pray*, you must not be like the hypocrites. For they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and at the street corners, that they may be seen by others. Truly, I say to you, they have received their reward. But** ***when you pray*, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father who is in secret. And your Father who sees in secret will reward you. And** ***when you pray*, do not heap up empty phrases as the Gentiles do, for they think that they will be heard for their many words. Do not be like them, for your Father knows what you need before you ask Him.**  (Matt. 6:5–8)

After teaching us all of this in Matthew, chapter 6, our Lord Jesus then teaches us the Lord's Prayer — a correct prayer — a very correct prayer known by all. After teaching us the Lord's Prayer in Matthew, chapter 6, our Lord Jesus then underlines what we call the Fifth Petition: **"For if you forgive others their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you, but if you do not forgive others their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses"**  (Matt. 6:14–15).

And, belovèd in the Lord, quickly we are back at the Cross — the Cross for which Christ is born in Bethlehem — and we are back at the *\[altar]*  altar and are given what to focus on at Holy Communion, where the benefits of the Cross come to us in the true body and blood of Jesus Christ and we are most surely forgiven. As often as we eat this bread and drink this cup we are certain that these are Christ's true body and true blood given and shed for us for the forgiveness of our sins. This is most certainly true. We receive the benefits of the Cross on our own lips — we are forgiven all our sins and we are glad. We are most certainly glad, and this thankfulness directs our prayers and our words and our actions.

*\[Direct]*  Please turn to p. 11 of your bulletin, to the Fifth Petition and let us read it responsively once more. Here we learn how our gladness spreads to our neighbor. *\[Read Fifth Petition responsively]*  Our gladness for being forgiven at the Cross never ends as we *sincerely forgive and gladly do good to those who sin against us*. This is the mark of a Christian. This is how we shine as lights in the world. This a gift to us — a gift of the Spirit, a miracle of the Spirit — that we are able at all to forgive and gladly do good to those who sin against us — a gift of the Spirit won for us at the Cross and given to us through *\[altar]* the faithful reception of the Sacrament. This alone already gives us enough with which to us busy in prayer.

*\[Transition]*  But there's more. Let us also turn to our psalm on p. 4. Please note that I marked the psalm for singing. *\[Ask]*  Were you were in Bible study last Sunday? Shall we sing the first two verses? *\[Sing vv. 1–2, if there are willing participants]*  *When we pray*, it is fitting to remember what God has done and also *study* it. We, for the last several weeks have studied that God became incarnate to save us, as the Scriptures foretold. No need to repeat the season of Advent again — no need to repeat Christmas Eve again — we just did those — we studied what God has done so that He was born of a virgin as Immanuel, God With Us. But **"Great are the works of the LORD, studied by all who delight in them."**  What a great work it is that the Holy Spirit overshadowed Mary and she conceived God as a man in her womb. We studied it this year and we'll study it again next year.

Moving on to v. 3 of our psalm, *\[Sing v. 3, if there are willing participants]*  Christ is born as one of us to work the Father's righteousness. We have the Father's answer to what's right and what's wrong — He is born on Christmas Day. What's wrong is that sinners should perish. What's right is that Jesus has come to save us sinners. We will soon observe the Baptism of Christ. Christ will show up with us to be baptized by John, yet Christ is the Sinless One. John will object to baptizing Jesus.
> **"I need to be baptized by you, and do You come to me?" But Jesus answered him, "Let it be so now, for thus it is fitting for us** ***to fulfill all righteousness*."**  (Matt. 3:14a–15a)

Christ has come to fulfill all righteousness — to punish the evil and reward the good, but He will work it wonderfully to the advantage of sinners — He comes to save us in a way that we understand that our sins to not deserve. But our heavenly Father loves us and quite simply does not want us to die — the Lord is gracious and merciful. We believe it, but Psalm 145 also teaches us how to pray it. *\[Sing it]*
> **The LORD is gracious and | merciful,\* slow to anger and abounding in | steadfast love.** 
> **The LORD is | good to all,\* and his mercy is over all that | He has made.**  (Ps. 145:8–9)

Belovèd in the Lord, we have the Lord's Prayer, but we also have the Psalms. Praying the Psalms all day may heap up phrases, but not one of them is empty. Let us then pray without ceasing (1 Thess. 5:17), and **the peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes