---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: August 31, 2025
title: THEIR WORKS CRY OUT FOR MERCY
occasion: 12th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Prov. 25:2-10
  - Heb. 13:1-17
  - Luke 14:1-14
sermon_text: Luke 14:1-14
bible_version: ESV
---

# THEIR WORKS CRY OUT FOR MERCY
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We remember You and thank You, Lord Jesus, for You have redeemed us from our sinful works. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today's Holy Gospel comes to us in two parts: first, our Lord Jesus heals on the Sabbath, and second, our Lord teaches about places of honor or humiliation at a banquet. Though we will consider the place of honor before God, I do not want to neglect the Sabbath, for we always have the Third Commandment, **"Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy,"**  and we do want to honor it today and every Sabbath day as God has ordained it.

Today is as good day as any to bring up the Sabbath. For as we hear the Gospels of *\[statues]*  Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, we cannot help but notice that our Lord Jesus often gets into conflict with the lawyers and the Pharisees over the the Sabbath. "Who's working on the Sabbath? You're not supposed to be working on the Sabbath." We have one of these cases at the beginning of today's Holy Gospel.
> **One Sabbath, when \[Jesus] went to dine at the house of a ruler of the Pharisees, they were watching Him carefully. And behold, there was a man before Him who had dropsy,**

They're watching Him because not long ago He freed a woman from a disabling spirit, which she had had for eighteen years, but He did it *on the Sabbath* (Luke 13:10–17). Now it's the Sabbath again, and this time here's a man with dropsy, which is also called by the medical term *edema*; this is the swelling of the arms and legs. (By the way, keep your legs elevated if they're swollen.)
> **And Jesus responded to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, "Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath, or not?" But they remained silent.**

**"Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?"**  The answer to our Lord's question is yes, but why are the lawyers and Pharisees silent? They are silent because they think the answer is no. For the lawyers and Pharisees know the Third Commandment that was given to Moses on Mt. Sinai as recorded in Exodus, chapter 20.
> **Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six days you shall labor, and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God. On it you shall not do any work, you, or your son, or your daughter, your male servant, or your female servant, or your livestock, or the sojourner who is within your gates.**  (Ex. 20:8–10)

The lawyers and Pharisees know the Third Commandment and they know that no work is to be done. They're watching Jesus to see if He'll work on the Sabbath and break the Commandment. They're also the publicly recognized interpreters of God's Law.

Going back to Exodus 20, though, the LORD gives an explanation that goes along with the Commandment:
> ***For in six days the LORD made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day.***  **Therefore the LORD blessed the Sabbath day and made it holy.**  (Ex. 20:11)

The explanation is that we remember all of God's work in Creation and how He rested on the seventh day.

Now let us take note that the Third Commandment is repeated again in Deuteronomy, chapter 5, and here it is:
> **Observe the Sabbath day, to keep it holy, as the LORD your God commanded you. Six days you shall labor and do all your work, but the seventh day is a Sabbath to the LORD your God. On it you shall not do any work, you or your son or your daughter or your male servant or your female servant, or your ox or your donkey or any of your livestock, or the sojourner who is within your gates, that your male servant and your female servant may rest as well as you.**

This part is the same: everyone and the livestock are to rest from their labor on the Sabbath. Take a break!—God's giving you a break. However, the rationale offered here, in Deuteronomy 5, is different than the rationale offered in Exodus 20.
> ***You shall remember that you were a slave in the land of Egypt, and the LORD your God brought you out from there with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm.***  **Therefore the LORD your God commanded you to keep the Sabbath day.**  (Deut. 5:12–15)

Belovèd in the Lord, there's a difference—or I would say there's a *progression*—from Exodus 20 to Deuteronomy 5. In Exodus 20, the LORD refers to resting from His work of Creation, but in Deuteronomy 5, the LORD refers to God giving Israel rest from their work as slaves in Egypt. In Deuteronomy 5, God tells His people that He's giving them rest from slavery.

Rest from slavery—belovèd in the Lord, let's slow down here and make sure we get this right. There's a word for *rest from slavery*. The word I'm thinking of—and I invite you to think of it, too—the word I'm thinking of is not only rest from slavery but actually being *freed* from slavery altogether—you're not a slave anymore—you've been freed from slavery. Your freedom from slavery has been purchased by someone. Someone, not you, has paid a lot of money to free you from slavery. The price has been paid, your master has released you, and you are now free. *\[Ask]*  What is this word? This word is used to summarize the main teaching of the Bible. This word appears as the heading for the Second Article of the Creed in Luther's Small Catechism. Belovèd in the Lord, do you know this word? Do you know what this wonderful word is that means the purchase of the freedom of a slave? The word is *redemption*—*redemption* means to purchase the freedom of a slave, and our Christian faith is this: we believe that our freedom from slavery to the devil, sin, and death was purchased not with gold or silver, but with the holy, precious blood and the innocent suffering and death of our Lord Jesus. Alleluia! He set us free. And **"if the Son sets you free, you will be free indeed"**  (John 8:36). Alleluia!

When the LORD explains His Commandment to remember the Sabbath in Deuteronomy 5, He says, "Take a break and remember My redemption—you were once a slave but I freed you."

Now, going back to the Holy Gospel,
> **Then \[Jesus] took \[the man with dropsy] and healed him and sent him away. And he said to them, "Which of you, having a son or an ox that has fallen into a well on a Sabbath day, will not immediately pull him out?" And they could not reply to these things.**

"What's wrong with pulling your own child out of the well on the Sabbath?" asks our Lord. (Nothing, I hope.) Redemption—the Bible loves the word *redemption* because that's what our Lord loves to do—he loves to redeem us. And now we have come to a word study about this word. I want to point out that the word *redemption* has a *\[gesture]*  narrow sense and a wide sense. The narrow sense of *redemption* is to buy the freedom of a slave but the *wide* sense of redemption is to get someone out of *any kind* of trouble. For this wide sense of redemption we need look no futher than the last verse of Psalm 25: **"Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his** ***troubles*"**  (Ps. 25:22). So it is written. No specific reference to slavery here, just "Lord, get me out of this trouble. Lord, redeem me." This, belovèd in the Lord, is the *wide* sense of redemption.

Pulling your son or your ox out of the well is pulling it out of trouble. Healing the man with dropsy is getting him out of trouble. Freeing a woman from a disabling spirit is getting her out of trouble. In today's Holy Gospel, Christ challenges the lawyers and the Pharisees to see that remembering redemption is the very spirit of the Sabbath and doing it is no problem at all. Getting someone else out of trouble on the Sabbath honors God, who got us out of trouble and wants us to remember it *and do it for others*, even on the Sabbath. But the lawyers and Pharisees refuse to see it. They interpret the Sabbath to mean "strictly no work, not even getting someone out of trouble."

*\[Transition]*  "Ah, *work*. Let's talk about work." The lawyers and Pharisees are proud of their work, for, as I mentioned, they are the ones to show the people how to do good keeping God's Commandments. They rest from their *\[sarcastic]*  outstanding work on the Sabbath, according to the Commandment, but, as we shall see, THEIR WORKS CRY OUT … FOR MERCY. The Pharisees are the interpreters and keepers of the Law of Moses. They interpret and keep the Ten Commandments. They interpret and keep the ceremonial laws concerning worship at the temple. They are examples to the nation of Israel of God's Law properly taught and kept.

But Christ knows their hearts and He sees what they do in private, as it is written in Matthew, chapter 25.
> **Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitewashed tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but within are full of dead people's bones and all uncleanness. So you also outwardly appear righteous to others, but within you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.**  (Matt. 23:27–28)

St. Paul gets right to the point in Romans, chapter 2,
> **If you call yourself a Jew and rely on the law and boast in God and know His will and approve what is excellent, because you are instructed from the law; and if you are sure that you yourself are a guide to the blind, a light to those who are in darkness, … you then who teach others, do you not teach yourself? While you preach against stealing, do you steal? You who say that one must not commit adultery, do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples? You who boast in the law dishonor God by breaking the law. For, as it is written, "The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you."**  (Rom. 2:17–19, 21–24)

In private, the lawyers and Pharisees are idolaters. In private, they commit the sins that they teach others not to do—they're hypocrites, as our Lord declares. But now let's change the pronoun according to hidden sin that the Lord may see in our hearts: *OUR* WORKS CRY OUT FOR MERCY, too, as the prophet Isaiah declares, **"We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and we all do fade as a leaf; and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away"**  (Is. 64:6).

Belovèd in the Lord, our Lord Jesus has redeemed us from the trouble our works have gotten us into, plain and simple. Our works are corrupted with sin and deserve nothing but punishment. Yet
> **He was pierced for our transgressions; He was crushed for our sins. The punishment that brought us peace was upon Him.**  (Is. 53:5; song)

He has redeemed us from sin, death, devil, and hell, and we are grateful. We gather on the Sabbath in remembrance of His redemption *\[altar]*  remember at His wedding feast. When we come to *\[altar]*  His wedding feast, what do we confess? "Lord, MY WORKS CRY OUT FOR MERCY, and I'm here to receive it. I will take the lowest place, but would be most grateful to receive Your body and blood, given and shed for me for the forgiveness of my sin."

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Ps. 131, the psalm for today, is very short.

Another healing on the Sabbath:
Luke 13:10–17
\[10] Now he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath. \[11] And behold, there was a woman who had had a disabling spirit for eighteen years. She was bent over and could not fully straighten herself. \[12] When Jesus saw her, he called her over and said to her, “Woman, you are freed from your disability.” \[13] And he laid his hands on her, and immediately she was made straight, and she glorified God. \[14] But the ruler of the synagogue, indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the people, “There are six days in which work ought to be done. Come on those days and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day.” \[15] Then the Lord answered him, “You hypocrites! Does not each of you on the Sabbath untie his ox or his donkey from the manger and lead it away to water it? \[16] And ought not this woman, a daughter of Abraham whom Satan bound for eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the Sabbath day?” \[17] As he said these things, all his adversaries were put to shame, and all the people rejoiced at all the glorious things that were done by him. (ESV)

Last week's Holy Gospel, had we stuck with the three-year lectionary:
Luke 13:22–30
\[22] He went on his way through towns and villages, teaching and journeying toward Jerusalem. \[23] And someone said to him, “Lord, will those who are saved be few?” And he said to them, \[24] “Strive to enter through the narrow door. For many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able. \[25] When once the master of the house has risen and shut the door, and you begin to stand outside and to knock at the door, saying, ‘Lord, open to us,’ then he will answer you, ‘I do not know where you come from.’ \[26] Then you will begin to say, ‘We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.’ \[27] But he will say, ‘I tell you, I do not know where you come from. Depart from me, all you workers of evil!’ \[28] In that place there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God but you yourselves cast out. \[29] And people will come from east and west, and from north and south, and recline at table in the kingdom of God. \[30] And behold, some are last who will be first, and some are first who will be last.” (ESV)

1 Peter 2:18–25
\[18] Servants, be subject to your masters with all respect, not only to the good and gentle but also to the unjust. \[19] For this is a gracious thing, when, mindful of God, one endures sorrows while suffering unjustly. \[20] For what credit is it if, when you sin and are beaten for it, you endure? But if when you do good and suffer for it you endure, this is a gracious thing in the sight of God. \[21] For to this you have been called, because Christ also suffered for you, leaving you an example, so that you might follow in his steps. \[22] He committed no sin, neither was deceit found in his mouth. \[23] When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; when he suffered, he did not threaten, but continued entrusting himself to him who judges justly. \[24] He himself bore our sins in his body on the tree, that we might die to sin and live to righteousness. By his wounds you have been healed. \[25] For you were straying like sheep, but have now returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls. (ESV)

1 Peter 5:6–11
\[6] Humble yourselves, therefore, under the mighty hand of God so that at the proper time he may exalt you, \[7] casting all your anxieties on him, because he cares for you. \[8] Be sober-minded; be watchful. Your adversary the devil prowls around like a roaring lion, seeking someone to devour. \[9] Resist him, firm in your faith, knowing that the same kinds of suffering are being experienced by your brotherhood throughout the world. \[10] And after you have suffered a little while, the God of all grace, who has called you to his eternal glory in Christ, will himself restore, confirm, strengthen, and establish you. \[11] To him be the dominion forever and ever. Amen. (ESV)

Hebrews 13:5
\[5] Keep your life free from love of money, and be content with what you have, for he has said, “I will never leave you nor forsake you.” (ESV)

I believe this verse is on the gravestone of F.C.D. Wyneken:
Hebrews 13:7
\[7] Remember your leaders, those who spoke to you the word of God. Consider the outcome of their way of life, and imitate their faith. (ESV)

Revelation 21:2–4
\[2] And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. \[3] And I heard a loud voice from the throne saying, “Behold, the dwelling place of God is with man. He will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God. \[4] He will wipe away every tear from their eyes, and death shall be no more, neither shall there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain anymore, for the former things have passed away.” (ESV)

Revelation 22:12–15
\[12] “Behold, I am coming soon, bringing my recompense with me, to repay each one for what he has done. \[13] I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.”
\[14] Blessed are those who wash their robes, so that they may have the right to the tree of life and that they may enter the city by the gates. \[15] Outside are the dogs and sorcerers and the sexually immoral and murderers and idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood. (ESV)

There is godly pride and there is ungodly pride. Perhaps this distinction can be explained under one term: the fear of the Lord.