---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: September 8, 2024
title: THANK GOD FOR HER
occasion: 16th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Is. 35:4-7
  - James 2:1-10, 14-18
  - Mark 7:24-37
sermon_text: Mark 7:24-37
bible_version: ESV
---

# THANK GOD FOR HER

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Lord, help us to see what You are able to do for us and to desire it with our whole heart. In Jesus' name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, there are women in our lives about whom we can only say "THANK GOD FOR HER." "Thank God for Mom" is what we say on Mother's Day. There are also women in the Bible who, when we think of them, we can only say, "THANK GOD FOR HER." There are two women in the Bible that I want to acknowledge today, who also happen to be mothers.

The first woman is Mary, the mother of our Lord. She is so wonderful that we acknowledge her every time we confess the Creed that Christ *was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the virgin Mary*—this is our faith. Whereas St. Paul refers to Christ as the second *Adam* (Rom. 8:12–20), we might refer to Mary as the second *Eve*. *\[Ask]*  Why would we call Mary the second Eve? Because where Eve's faith faltered Mary's faith shines.

We can connect the whole Bible back to the beginning, to Genesis, chapter 3. Eve had been given God's Word about the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. The LORD did say, **"Of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat"**  (Gen. 2:17a). But the ancient serpent, the devil, tempted Eve and she lost faith in God's Word. And what came of it? *\[Understatement]*  "Oops! I shouldn't have done that." The misery brought upon mankind by Eve's single act of unbelief is unfathomable other than we're all in it. Lord, have mercy!

But see the faith of Mary. To compare to Eve's unbelief we have the faith of Mary. The angel Gabriel comes to Mary with a Word from the Lord:
> **Do not be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God. And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus. He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High.**  (Luke 1:30–32a)

Belovèd in the Lord, *Mary believes every word of it*—she may ask for an explanation, but she still believes every word of it. And that's why we say, "THANK GOD FOR HER." She believes and conceives and what comes of it? *\[Ask]*  Who is the Child in her happy womb? The Child in her womb is her Savior—she has conceived according to God's eternal purpose the Savior who saves us from the misery of Eve—from that misery which God foresaw would fall upon us in Eden. Mary, through her *faith*, *undoes* all the misery brought on us by the unbelief of Eve. Mary herself is not the Savior, but *by her faith in God's Word* the Savior has entered our world to do what we need Him for—to *un*do—*\[Cross]*  to die on the Cross winning our forgiveness and destroying the works of the devil (1 John 3:8b). The worst disaster that ever came upon us is over, and happy days are here again! *\[Easter]*  Alleluia!

*\[Transition]*  What the Bible lays before us time and time again is unbelief … and faith. *\[Understatement]*  Unbelief's a bear. God says turn left and we turn right—rebellion is at the heart of unbelief—we are offended that God would tell us anything for our own good so we don't listen to Him or we try to "improve" on what He tells us. What more is there to say? We know what it feels like to rebel against God's Word—we know it too well—we know what comes of it—we wish it never happened—but we are sadly born with our sinful flesh and it shows in our unbelief, and I don't want to talk about it anymore.

But *faith* … belovèd in the Lord, faith is the best—far, far better than unbelief. We can always turn quickly to Abraham—he's our shining example of faith—*\[understatement again]*  we've heard about him more than once. You know about Abraham and Sarah being promised a son in their old age. Let us then also share **the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all, as it is written, "I have made you the father of many nations"—in the presence of the God** ***in whom he believed*, who gives life to the dead and calls into existence the things that are not** (Rom. 4:16b–17; altered translation).

The second woman in the Bible that I want to acknowledge today shares the faith of Abraham; she is the Syrophoenician woman whose daughter has an unclean spirit. We find her in today's Holy Gospel. The Syrophoenician woman, like Mary, is a *shining example of faith*. And whose example of unbelief can we compare her to? Compare her to the scribes and Pharisees. She appears to us at the end of Mark, chapter 7, and we need look no further than the earlier verses of Mark 7 to find—who else?—but *the scribes and the Pharisees*.

I want to point out that the scribes and the Pharisees know *a whole lot more about the Bible* than the Syrophoenician woman does. Ezra in the Old Testament was a scribe (Ezra 7:11)—a good one, that is. The scribes are serious students of God's Law. They are the professionals who copy the Scriptures and draft legal documents as well. In short, the scribes are highly trained, especially in the Bible. But I have brought up their error over the last couple of weeks—they constantly clash with our Lord Jesus. They have hardened their hearts against God's Law in such a way that they, along with the Pharisees, "improve" on God's Law only to create spiritual *confusion* for any who would listen to them—they do the devil's work. They make their disciples wash their hands but ignore the dangers of the evil that comes from our hearts. The scribes add to God's Law—*HERE A LITTLE, THERE A LITTLE*—so that their disciples end up *breaking* God's Law. The scribes in Mark 7, as knowledgeable as they are, are headed to hell because they don't know or teach the Bible *correctly*.

I made the point two weeks ago that the prophet Isaiah clearly warns that those who add to God's Law and play around with it are under God's wrath—not a slap on the hand—they are appointed to drink from God's cup of wrath (Is. 28:7–8). The scribes' error is *not* harmless—it's no minor error—it's a *major* error—their error has dragged them into *unbelief*—even these Bible scholars have fallen victim to unbelief! For an idolater appointed to drink from the cup of God's wrath cannot possibly believe in the One True God.

For if the scribes understood the Scriptures *correctly*, they would come to Jesus *just like the Syrophoenician woman does*. But she hardly knows the Bible … but she sees Jesus. There's the difference: *she has faith in Jesus*; the scribes do not. She is the second woman in the Bible I would like to acknowledge today as the one out of whose heart comes a most tender confession *of faith in Jesus*—THE THINGS THAT COME OUT OF A PERSON—the words that come from her heart should always live in ours. She says to our Lord, **"Even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs."**  *\[Bulletin cover]*

*\[Ask]*  Has this Syrophoenician woman studied the Scriptures for long? Maybe not at all! And note where our Lord Jesus is—pay close attention to where this woman lives: she lives in the region of *Tyre and Sidon*, on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea. *\[Ask]*  Who in the Old Testament was the daughter of the king of Sidon? *\[Sour]*  Jezebel (1 Ki. 18:31), and I don't want to talk about it anymore. Tyre and Sidon are famous pagan cities. I believe that at the time of our Lord's visit to Tyre and Sidon Baal is still worshiped there, and at the very least the consequences of generations of Baal worship are still felt there. I suspect that the woman's poor daughter is not the only child in Tyre and Sidon with an unclean spirit. But, thanks be to God, this particular Syrophoenician woman is the blessèd one to be in the presence of Christ, the One True God who can save her daughter.

She begs our Lord Jesus to cast the demon out of her daughter. "Baal can't do it—Baal is the one who brought the demon. Lord Jesus, *You* can do it. Cast the demon out of her." And He says to her, **"Let the children be fed first, for it is not right to take the children's bread and throw it to** ***the dogs*."**  That's not very nice: our Lord Jesus calls this woman a dog! But coming from an idolatrous nation is not very nice, either. What is crystal clear to her now is that Baal cannot help her daughter but Jesus *can*—Jesus has come to destroy the works of the devil. She trusts Him to do it and is not ashamed to come to Him begging for crumbs, **"Yes, Lord; even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs."**  The blessèd Syrophoenician woman calls Him *Lord* … Baal is no longer her Lord—she calls *Jesus Lord* … and she has it all—she leaves the scribes and Pharisees in her dust. *\[Ask]*  And does she not seem to you to be the kind of woman who can take it and dish it out?
> **\[Jesus says] to her, "For this statement you may go your way; the demon has left your daughter." And she went home and found the child lying in bed and the demon \[happily] gone.**

Belovèd in the Lord, may this woman always be in our hearts. The scribes, for all their faulty study of the Scriptures, have no idea of how to approach Jesus. She, on the other hand, quickly goes to Jesus *begging for mercy*—she calls Him *Lord* and He shows her mercy. THANK GOD FOR HER for showing us how to go to our Lord with our sins and receive free forgiveness—THANK GOD FOR HER for showing us to go to our Lord with the devil's oppression and be freed—THANK GOD FOR HER for showing us how to abandon our idols and turn to Jesus, our true Lord and God (John 19:28.

*\[Conclusion]*  I am a huge fan of the Syrophoenician woman. I would like to name her because she's that special—I'd like to pick a good name for her to be used for our own local reference—so we can all call her by a heartfelt and honorable name, not just *the Syrophoenician woman*. I have not chosen a name on my own but would like to wait to hear your nominations. You can tell me or call or text me at my number, which is listed with the Bible question. Lord, keep us in the faith that we finally learn her true name in heaven. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Readings

## Notes
James 2:10
\[10] For whoever keeps the whole law but fails in one point has become guilty of all of it. (ESV)

James 2:12–13
\[12] So speak and so act as those who are to be judged under the law of liberty. \[13] For judgment is without mercy to one who has shown no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment. (ESV)

James 2:17
\[17] So also faith by itself, if it does not have works, is dead. (ESV)

Hebrews 11. More examples of faith!
## Copy and paste
|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |