---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: June 15, 2025
title: I AM THE GOD OF ABRAHAM, THE GOD OF ISAAC, AND THE GOD OF JACOB.
occasion: Holy Trinity
readings:
  - Prov. 8:1-4, 22-31
  - Acts 2:14a, 22-36
  - John 8:48-59
sermon_text: John 8:48-59
bible_version: ESV
---

# I AM THE GOD OF ABRAHAM, THE GOD OF ISAAC, AND THE GOD OF JACOB.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Spirit, to ever see our Savior Jesus as our God and Lord. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, if you participated in Bible study when we studied the Nicene Creed, some of this may be familiar. I will zero in on one particular verse from today's Holy Gospel, and that is John 8:58: **"Jesus said to them, 'Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham was, I AM,' "**  This verse must be carefully read and properly interpreted or else we're missing a lot.

From this verse we can branch out into the rest of Scripture, but before we do, let's review basic grammar. Verbs have *tense*. *\[Ask]*  Who remembers this from English class?
* There's present perfect tense.
* There's present perfect continuous tense.
* There's past perfect continuous tense.
* And there's subjunctive, and more!

Let's keep it simple, though. We'll stick with simple past tense and simple present tense. *\[Illustration]*  Allow me to give you an example of the simple past and simple present tenses. Now that the weather's warm, we're both standing on the dock, ready to jump in the water, and I say, "Before you jump, I jump." That's simple present tense: the action is happening now. Okay—splash!—before you go in, I go in. *Splash—splash.*  Now we're both treading water and I look back at the dock and say, "Before you jumped, I *jumped*." That's simple past tense: the action happened in the past. Now, what if I said, "Before you jumped, I *jump*." That would be confusing because my sentence doesn't make sense: I said *jump* when I should have said *jumped*. My sentence does not make sense because the tenses do not match. (Now does that not give you a warm, fuzzy feeling from seventh grade English class?) In John 8:58, it appears at first glance that our Lord does not make sense because He says, **"Before Abraham was, I AM."**  It would make sense would be if He said, "Before Abraham was, I was," which would make Jesus older than Abraham. What are we to do—fix our Lord's grammar? When we translate the Bible, should we help our readers by having Christ say, "Before Abraham was, I was"? If we do—even with the best of intentions—we are doing a huge disservice to the Christian Church, and we're about to find out why.

*\[Transition]*  For in order to see what Christ says in John, chapter 8, we need to remember the account of Moses and the burning bush back in Exodus, chapter 3. We are at a huge disadvantage if we read John, chapter 8 without, by the grace of the Spirit, remembering Exodus, chapter 3. *\[Ask]*  Who remembers Moses and the burning bush?
> **The angel of the LORD appeared to \[Moses] in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. He looked, and behold, the bush was burning, yet it was not consumed. And Moses said, "I will turn aside to see this great sight, why the bush is not burned." When the LORD saw that \[Moses] turned aside to see, God called to him out of the bush, "Moses, Moses!" And he said, "Here I am."**  (Ex. 3:2–4)

God spoke to Moses out of the burning bush, and many of you remember this scene with Charlton Heston as Moses.
> **Then \[the LORD] said, "Do not come near; take your sandals off your feet, for the place on which you are standing is holy ground." And He said, "I am the God of your father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob." And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God.**  (Ex. 3:5–6)

This is a natural response—for us sinners to be afraid before God, who hates sin. (Yes, belovèd in the Lord, He may hate sin but He loves … the sinner, as we shall see.)
> **Then the LORD said, "I have surely seen the affliction of My people who are in Egypt and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters. … I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians and to bring them up out of that land to a good and broad land, a land flowing with milk and honey, … Come, I will send you\[, Moses,] to Pharaoh that you may bring My people, the children of Israel, out of Egypt."**  (Ex. 3:7a, 8a, 10)

The One True God of Israel, **the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,**  has called Moses to lead His children out of slavery in Egypt to live free in the Promised Land flowing with milk and honey.
> **Then Moses said to God, "If I come to the people of Israel and say to them, 'The God of your fathers has sent me to you,' and they ask me, 'What is his name?' what shall I say to them?"**  (Ex. 3:13)

Moses was at the burning bush talking with God and he asked God, "What is Your name?" Did God tell Moses His name? We've gotten into all kinds of details from the Old Testament when all we want to do is understand what Christ says in John 8:58. If the Holy Spirit does not bring it to our remembrance, we miss what Christ is telling us.
> **God said to Moses, "I AM WHO I AM." And he said, "Say this to the people of Israel: '** ***I AM*** **has sent me to you.' "**  (Ex. 3:14)

We have learned at the burning bush that God's name is I AM. Now let's listen to our Lord Jesus again: **"Before Abraham was, I AM."**  *\[Ask]*  What is Christ saying? He's calling Himself by God's own name! "Aw, c'mon. That's a stretch." Really? What is written in John, chapter 5? **"This was why the Jews were seeking all the more to kill \[Jesus], because not only was He breaking the Sabbath, but He was even calling God his own Father, making himself** ***equal with God*"**  (John 5:18). Christ, in John 8:58, reveals that He's **the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob**. **"So they picked up stones to throw at him, but Jesus hid himself and went out of the temple."**

Without flat out saying, "I am God," our Lord Jesus *implies* He is God by using the Divine Name, I AM, for Himself. *\[Illustration]*  Let me give you an example of what it means to be implicit. Do you know what I was doing nine years ago? I was doing a chase-down block on Andre Iguodala. Now, what am I saying? … *\[Ask]*  Can anyone tell me? I'm saying I'm Lebron James. If you weren't watching Game 7 against the Warriors nine years ago, you wouldn't know what I'm talking about. But if you did watch it, you would know that I'm *implying* I'm Lebron James. Christ is *implying* that He is God who spoke to Moses at the burning bush. *\[Make comment on the St. Mark bulletin cover.]*

"Okay, okay. That's some fancy Bible interpretation. Does the Bible ever flat-out call Jesus *God*?" Why, thanks for asking! St. Paul writes in Titus 2:13, **"\[We are] waiting for our blessed hope, the appearing of the glory of** ***our great God and Savior Jesus Christ*."**  And here's another one for good measure. Doubting Thomas sees our risen Savior and says in John 20:18, **"My Lord and my God!"**

Are we done now with the burning bush? No, we're never done with God's Word. **"\[God] said \[to Moses], 'But I will be with you, and this shall be the sign for you, that I have sent you: when you have brought the people out of Egypt, you shall serve God** ***on this mountain*' "**  (Ex. 3:12). *\[Ask]*  Do you remember what mountain that was where Moses spoke to God in the burning bush? It was Mt. Sinai, where the Israelites would all gather with Moses and where God would give Moses … those Ten Commandments. (Can you see Charlton Heston now?)

What comfort are we to receive from the Ten Commandments? What comfort is there if none of us have kept the Ten Commandments perfectly? What comfort are we to receive from knowing that Jesus is the God of Israel who invited Moses back to Mt. Sinai? Which one among us is going to go up to Jesus first and say, "Judge me according to your holy Commandments?" *\[Humor]*  You go first; I'll watch.
> **Woe is me! For I am lost; for I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips.**  (Is. 6:5a)

Belovèd in the Lord, we have no need to seek comfort at Sinai, for our Lord Jesus calls Himself *I AM* in the temple in Jerusalem, on another mountain—Jesus has appeared on *Mt. Zion*, not Mt. Sinai, where something new and wonderful is to happen. For it is on Mt. Zion that our Lord Jesus was crucified, bearing our sins, and winning for us the full forgiveness of our sins. The True God of Israel, **the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob**, speaks to us again—this time not at the burning bush, but at *\[Crucifixion]*  the Cross: **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do"**  (Luke 23:34).

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes