---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 20, 2025
title: I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES
occasion: Easter sunrise
readings:
  - Job 19:23-27
  - 1 Cor. 15:51-57
  - John 20:1-18
sermon_text: Job 19:23-27
bible_version: ESV
---

# I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES
Belovèd in the Lord, what do *I* know? I know my name. I know Trina's name. I know Trina's birthday. I know my own birthday, too. But the Lord knows the day I'll die. And when that day comes, there will likely appear a headstone *\[point to Section M]*  in Section M engraved with all the things I know plus that day that the Lord knows.

But there's more to engrave on a rock forever. Job tells us,
> **Oh that my words were written!** 
> **Oh that they were inscribed in a book!** 
> **Oh that with an iron pen and lead**
> **they were** ***engraved in the rock forever*!** 
> **For I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES,** 
> **and at the last He will stand upon the earth.**

Christ, who bore my sins on the Cross and died, *lives*. He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! He has burst from the grave and He lives! Engrave *that*—engrave that on every headstone of every believer in Christ: **I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES**. Belovèd in the Lord, take this to heart: *\[hand over heart]*  *my* Redeemer Jesus lives. Alleluia! He has redeemed *me*, a lost and condemned person, purchased and won me from all sins, from death, and from the power of the devil.

On this day that Jesus rose from the grave, He won for me and all believers *the* decisive victory over the devil: the serpent's head is crushed (Gen. 3:15). The devil's head was crushed already on Good Friday when Christ bore my sins on the Cross, but today there is no doubt about His victory. Back on the Wednesday of Holy Week the devil had entered into Judas to engineer Christ's death (Luke 22:3). As Christ died in agony on Good Friday it did appear that the devil had won. As Christ's lifeless body was laid in the tomb by Joseph of Arimathea (Luke 23:50–53) it did not appear that Christ was victorious: it appeared that the devil had won.

Belovèd in the Lord, remember the strength hidden in Christ's weakness in His hour of death. Never forget that at the moment He died the curtain of the temple was torn in two from top to bottom, remember that the earth shook and the rocks were split at the moment of Christ's death, and remember especially that many bodies of the saints were raised from the dead and appeared in Jerusalem at the moment Christ died (Matt. 27:51–53). Belovèd in the Lord, never forget that *Christ turns death into life.*

And so, the devil's head was crushed already on Good Friday, but we get to see Christ's victory in the open when He appears alive from the dead on Easter Sunday! It is clear that nothing that the devil threw at Him stuck. Even though Christ was given to death, death could not hold Him (Acts 2:24)!

And as for the devil, the Bible is clear:
> **Rejoice, O heavens and you who dwell in them! But woe to you, O earth and sea, for the devil has come down to you in great wrath,**  ***because he knows that his time is short*!**  (Rev. 12:12)

Though the devil still works woe here on earth, Christ's victory has marked him for eternal torment. Satan will be thrown into the lake of fire along with the beast and the false prophet (Rev. 20:10). Though it is—and Job would agree (Job 1:21)—though it is God's good and gracious will to allow Satan to still afflict us here on earth, what we learn from our trials—when our faith in Christ sustains us—when we remember that He did baptize us and still feeds us with His body and blood for the forgiveness of our sins—when the Spirit strengthens us through Christ's Word and Sacrament—what we learn from our trials is *only one thing*: *\[Sing]*
> *He lives, all glory to His name!*
> *He lives, my Jesus, still the same;*
> *Oh, the sweet joy this sentence gives:*
> *I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES!*

At the name of Christ the devil must leave, and he knows his time is short.

*\[Understatement]*  Having some familiarity with the devil, Job might know what he's talking about:
> **I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES, and at the last \[Christ] will stand upon the earth. And after my skin has been thus destroyed, yet in my flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for myself, and my eyes shall behold, and not another.**&#x20;

Job knows his own death is coming—God has allowed Satan to afflicted him so that he feels like death is knocking at the door. However, Job's Redeemer, Jesus Christ, will work this wonder that after Job's skin is destroyed—*\[graves]*  after his flesh is dead and decayed—he will, *in his own living flesh*, see God *with his own eyes*. Job has heard this promise from God and *he believes it–he knows that his Redeemer lives* and will deliver him from the devil and from his silly friends.

The catch is—do you know what the catch is?—the catch is that Job lived in the Old Testament days long before Christ was born. Christ had not been born of Mary yet. Christ had not yet suffered under Pontius Pilate. Christ had not been crucified, died, and buried. He hadn't risen from the dead yet. How could Job believe in Christ if Christ hadn't died on the Cross and been raised from the dead? How could Job believe Job had likely heard a prophetic Word of who Christ is and what Christ *would do*, *and Job believed it* because God had said it, like you and I do. Job looked forward in history as you and I look backward in history to Good Friday and the Cross—to Easter Sunday and the empty tomb. We look upon the same Redeemer, Jesus Christ,
> my Lord, who has redeemed me, a lost and condemned person, purchased and won me from all sins, from death, and from the power of the devil; not with gold or silver, but with His holy, precious blood and with His innocent suffering and death, that I may be His own and live under Him in His kingdom and serve Him in everlasting righteousness, innocence, and blessedness, *just as He is risen from the dead*\[—He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!—]just as He is risen from the dead, lives and reigns to all eternity. This is most certainly true.
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes