---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 5, 2026
title: THE LORD HAS TRIUMPHED GLORIOUSLY
occasion: Easter Sunrise
readings:
  - Ex. 14:10-15:1
  - 1 Cor. 15:1-11
  - John 20:1-18
sermon_text: 1 Cor. 15:1-11
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE LORD HAS TRIUMPHED GLORIOUSLY

Belovèd in the Lord, Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! We have no greater joy than Easter joy! Although Christ *was* crucified, although He *did* die bearing our sins, although He *was* buried, the third day *He rose again —* the transaction is complete; our sins are *paid for*; our debt has been canceled and *our Redeemer lives*. He is risen indeed! Alleluia! Our Epistle reading declares that **He appeared to** ***more than five hundred brothers at one time***.

It is one thing to say, "Good for Jesus! I'm glad things turned out well for Him." But it's entirely another thing to say "Good for *me*! His victory is *mine*!" St. Paul writes, **"I would remind you, brothers, of the Gospel I preached to you, which you received, in which you stand, and by which you are being** ***saved*."**  Paul's preaching has a name: the *Gospel*. The Gospel — the Good News — is the preaching that Jesus' victory *is ours*. And the Gospel, when it is preached to us and sown it in our hearts — make no mistake — the Gospel, when it is sown in our hearts, *saves us*: the Gospel saves us from sin, the Gospel saves us from death, and the Gospel saves us from the devil. THE LORD HAS TRIUMPHED GLORIOUSLY. Bless us, Holy Spirit, we pray, to *keep* the Gospel in our hearts — to *cling to the Gospel* with all our might (Job 19:25–27) — and let it be sown now in our hearts and brought to us personally in our Baptism into Christ Jesus! St. Paul points out quite clearly that there is no Gospel without Christ's Resurrection: **"If Christ has not been raised, your faith is futile and you are still in your sins"**  (1 Cor. 15:17). But Jesus *has* been raised … and He has been raised according to plan.

You must know, belovèd in the Lord, that Christ did not die from an unexpected circumstance — Christ did not die for being in the wrong place, at the wrong time, for the wrong reason. No! Our Lord Jesus died according to the Father's **plan, formed of old, faithful and sure** (Is. 25:1). Our Lord Jesus died for being in the *right* place, at the *right* time, and for the *right* reason. Let us turn to the Scriptures and see.

As to the *right place*, it is written in Genesis, chapter 22, **"After these things God tested Abraham and said to him, … 'Take your son, your only son Isaac, whom you love, and go to the land of** ***Moriah*, and offer him there as a burnt offering on one of the mountains of which I shall tell you.' "**  (Gen. 22:1–2) *Moriah* is the land where Jerusalem and the temple was to be built. *Moriah* is the land where God held Abraham back from sacrificing his son, *marking* it as *the* place where God would sacrifice His own Son. Jesus did die at the right place.

As to the *right time*, it is written in Daniel, chapter 9,
> **Know therefore and understand that from the going out of the Word to restore and build Jerusalem to the coming of an Anointed One, a prince, there shall be** ***seven*** **weeks. Then for** ***sixty-two*** **weeks it shall be built again with squares and moat, but in a troubled time. And after the sixty‑two weeks, an Anointed One shall be** ***cut off*** **and shall have nothing.**  (Dan. 9:24–26)

Jesus is the anointed one who was cut off after sixty‑two weeks. He did die at the right time.

As to the *right reason*, it is written in Isaiah, chapter 53,
> **He was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He opened not his mouth; like a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and like a sheep that before its shearers is silent, so He opened not his mouth. By oppression and judgment He was taken away; and as for His generation, who considered that he was** ***cut off*** **out of the land of the living, stricken** ***for the transgression of my people*?**  (Is. 53:7–8)

Jesus did die for the right reason — He died for the transgression of His people. Jesus died for the right reason, at the right time, at the right place according to the Scriptures.

Moreover, He was also raised from the dead according to the Scriptures.

It is written in Jonah, chapter 2,
> **And the LORD appointed a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights. Then Jonah prayed to the LORD his God from the belly of the fish, … And the LORD spoke to the fish, and it vomited Jonah out upon the dry land.**  (Jonah 1:17; 2:1, 10)

And remember that our Lord did say,
> **An evil and adulterous generation seeks for a sign, but no sign will be given to it except the sign of the prophet Jonah. For just as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the great fish, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth** (Matt. 12:39–40)

And here we have that of which St. Paul writes to the Corinthians: **"Christ died for our sins in accordance with the Scriptures, … He was buried, … He was raised on the third day in accordance with the Scriptures."**  And to the Romans he writes, **"\[He] was delivered up for our trespasses and raised for our justification"**  (Rom. 4:25). THE LORD HAS TRIUMPHED GLORIOUSLY for us!
**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes