---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 10, 2024
title: JESUS LOVES YOU BUT I'M HIS FAVORITE.
occasion: 25th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - 1 Ki. 17:8-16
  - Heb. 9:24-28
  - Mark 12:38-44
sermon_text: Mark 12:38-44
bible_version: ESV
---

# JESUS LOVES YOU BUT I'M HIS FAVORITE.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Lord, with faith in You so that we, like the widow, are glad to give You everything we've got. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, there is someone we know who wears a sweatshirt that says, "JESUS LOVES YOU BUT I'M HIS FAVORITE." And she's a widow. And it's true. For God does not tire of tell in us that He particularly cares for the widows and the fatherless. I will now present to you a short sample of verses where God expresses His concern for the widows and the fatherless. *\[Give book and chapter for each of these verses.]*
> **You shall not mistreat any widow or fatherless child. If you do mistreat them, and they cry out to me, I will surely hear their cry, and my wrath will burn, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall become widows and your children fatherless.**  (Ex. 22:22–24)
> **\[The LORD] executes justice for the fatherless and the widow, and loves the sojourner, giving him food and clothing. Love the sojourner, therefore, for you were sojourners in the land of Egypt.**  (Deut. 10:18–19)


Okay, I said *widows* and *fatherless*, but God looks out for the sojourners, too. Who are the sojourners? They're the foreigners. God cares particularly for foreigners who have left their homes to live among God's people—He's constantly concerned about the foreigners along with the fatherless and the widows.
> **At the end of every three years you shall bring out all the tithe of your produce in the same year and lay it up within your towns. And the Levite, because he has no portion or inheritance with you, and the sojourner, the fatherless, and the widow, who are within your towns, shall come and eat and be filled, that the LORD your God may bless you in all the work of your hands that you do.**  (Deut. 14:28–29)
>
> **"Cursed be anyone who perverts the justice due to the sojourner, the fatherless, and the widow." And all the people shall say, "Amen."**  (Deut. 27:19)
> **Father of the fatherless and protector of widows is God in his holy habitation.**  (Ps. 68:5)
> **The LORD watches over the sojourners; he upholds the widow and the fatherless, but the way of the wicked he brings to ruin.**  (Ps. 146:9)
> **Learn to do good; seek justice, correct oppression; bring justice to the fatherless, plead the widow's cause.**  (Is. 1:17)
> **Woe to those who decree iniquitous decrees, and the writers who keep writing oppression, to turn aside the needy from justice and to rob the poor of my people of their right, that widows may be their spoil, and that they may make the fatherless their prey!**  (Is. 10:1–2)
> **If you truly amend your ways and your deeds, if you truly execute justice one with another, if you do not oppress the sojourner, the fatherless, or the widow, or shed innocent blood in this place, and if you do not go after other gods to your own harm, then I will let you dwell in this place, in the land that I gave of old to your fathers forever.**  (Jer. 7:5–7)
> **I will draw near to you for judgment. I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, against the adulterers, against those who swear falsely, against those who oppress the hired worker in his wages, the widow and the fatherless, against those who thrust aside the sojourner, and do not fear me, says the LORD of hosts.**  (Mal. 3:5)


From today's Holy Gospel,
> **Beware of the scribes, who like to walk around in long robes and like greetings in the marketplaces and have the best seats in the synagogues and the places of honor at feasts, who devour widows' houses and for a pretense make long prayers. They will receive the greater condemnation.**

Our Lord Jesus warns of the scribes who scam the widows, but in Luke, chapter 4, He upholds the widow at Zarephath, the widow of our Old Testament reading.
> **Truly, I say to you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown. But in truth, I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the heavens were shut up three years and six months, and a great famine came over all the land, and Elijah was sent to none of them but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.**  (Luke 4:24–26)
> **Religion that is pure and undefiled before God the Father is this: to visit orphans and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained from the world.**  (James 1:27)

There, I just read to you thirteen passages from the Bible about widows and that is but a short sample—I'm just scratching the surface. Over and over again about the widows and the fatherless (and don't forget the sojourner)—if that would be my whole sermon id would be okay because God never tires of telling us of His constant concern for the fatherless and the widows.

*\[Transition]*  Did it ever occur to you, belovèd in the Lord, that our God wants to show mercy?

* He wants to show mercy to the widow.
* He wants to show mercy to the fatherless.
* He wants to show mercy to the sojourner.
* But most of all … *\[Cross]*  He wants to show mercy to us sinners.

We have the Cross—we have our Lord Jesus who bears our sins because we do desperately needed Him to do it for us. Belovèd in the Lord, you and I are the needy widows because of our sin, and our heavenly Father has most certainly shown us mercy and given us free forgiveness in the name of His Son Jesus.

We have the widows and the fatherless, yes, but today's Holy Gospel is focused on widows. And we shall not overlook the widow at Zarephath from our Old Testament reading—we should also give her a name—she's so famous. We need to know the widow of Zarephath well—our children and grandchildren must be told about her. In case you need a refresher, here she is with the prophet Elijah.
> **The word of the LORD came to \[Elijah], "Arise, go to Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon, and dwell there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to feed you." So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks. And he called to her and said, "Bring me a little water in a vessel, that I may drink."** (1 Ki. 17:8–10)

There is a drought going on—there is hardly any food or drink to be had because Elijah has commanded the rain to stop to teach the idolaters of Tyre and Sidon the lesson that Baal does not give rain.
> **And as she was going to bring \[Elijah a drink], he called to her and said, "Bring me a morsel of bread in your hand." And she said, "As the LORD your God lives, I have nothing baked, only a handful of flour in a jar and a little oil in a jug. And now I am gathering a couple of sticks that I may go in and prepare it for myself and my son, that we may eat it and die."**  (1 Ki. 17:11–12)


That's how bad it was. "Give it to this crazy man and I'll have nothing for myself and my son before we starve to death."
> **And Elijah said to her, "Do not fear; go and do as you have said. But first make me a little cake of it and bring it to me, and afterward make something for yourself and your son. For thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, 'The jar of flour shall not be spent, and the jug of oil shall not be empty, until the day that the LORD sends rain upon the earth.'"** (1 Kings 17:13–14)


Belovèd in the Lord, *\[ask]*  is the jug of oil empty or full? Is the jar of flour empty or full? … The jar is full and the jug is full *because that's what God says*—they're full because He says they're full. This account of the widow at Zarephath is an excellent guide for us to understand what *\[font]*  Baptism is and what *\[altar]*  Holy Communion is. Holy Communion is plain bread and wine, but by God's Word it is Christ's true body and blood given and shed for us for the forgiveness of sins. Baptism is plain water, but by God's Word it is the water that washes away our sin and saves us. We can thank the widow at Zarephath for teaching us that.

*\[Transition]*  Our Lord is super-proud of this widow—proud enough to mention her in Luke, chapter 4, and He is also super-proud of the widow in today's Holy Gospel.
> **\[Jesus] sat down opposite the treasury and watched the people putting money into the offering box. Many rich people put in large sums. And a poor widow came and put in two small copper coins, which make a penny. And \[Jesus] called his disciples to him and said to them, "Truly, I say to you, this poor widow has put in more than all those who are contributing to the offering box. For they all contributed out of their abundance, but she out of her poverty has put in everything she had, all she had to live on."**


There she is: offering everything she has to the Lord. Is she not famous, too? We should also name her along with the widow at Zarephath. JESUS LOVES YOU BUT I'M HIS FAVORITE. The widows can claim this. But as we live as beggars before Christ so can we. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Here's [the bulletin cover](https://www.canva.com/design/DAGV_EPibUo/KzEkhfgcNUuULK-l5Yl5Fw/edit?utm_content=DAGV_EPibUo\&utm_campaign=designshare\&utm_medium=link2\&utm_source=sharebutton).


To be God's favorite is to be God's *belovèd*.

To be God's favorite is to be those whom God calls *blessèd*.
## Copy and paste


|                                                                     |                                                                                        |
| ------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Belovèd in the Lord                                                 | belovèd in the Lord                                                                    |
| He is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!                          | He is risen! \[He is risen indeed! Alleluia!]                                          |
| Friends of Christ                                                   | Can't deny it cuz God says it                                                          |
| I am the LORD; I have spoken, and I will do it (Ezek. 17:24b).      | making peace by the blood of His Cross (Col. 1:19b; another way to say *propitiation*) |
| as the Lord has forgiven you, so you also must forgive (Col. 3:13b) |                                                                                        |