---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 16, 2025
title: REJOICE IN THAT DAY, AND LEAP FOR JOY.
occasion: 6th Sunday after the Epiphany
readings:
  - Jer. 17:5-8
  - 1 Cor. 15:1-20
  - Luke 6:17-26
sermon_text: Luke 6:17-26
bible_version: ESV
---

# REJOICE IN THAT DAY, AND LEAP FOR JOY.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Help us, Holy Spirit, ever to cling to the forgiveness freely offered us in the name of Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, my van is parked in the parking lot and it has 232,000 miles on it. I would like to make it to 300,000, but my mechanic told me this week that we may be getting to the point that pushing to 300,000 might not be the wisest financial move. Why push to 300,000? To save money, if possible–vehicles are expensive. But there is also a joy of having had something that you have been able to rely on for a long time. And I do feel that way toward Ole Bessie, my van.

Our Holy Gospel for today is the Sermon on the Plain, recorded in Luke, chapter 6, that is similar to *\[Sermon on the Mount]*  the Sermon on the Mount, recorded in Matthew, chapters 5–7, because they both begin with the Beatitudes.
> **Blessèd are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessèd are you who are hungry now, for you shall be satisfied. Blessèd are you who weep now, for you shall laugh.**

Take note that our Lord, when He gives instruction, whether on the Plain or on the Mount, repeats the lesson with some variation.

And by way of review, if God calls us *blessèd* we have reason to be quite happy because to be blessèd means that we are God's favorites—He smiles upon us and is constantly concerned for our welfare. We all want to be blessèd.

And to this I want to add Christ's plain Word *about* His Word: **"Heaven and earth will pass away, but my Words will not pass away"**  (Matt. 24:35). So where are we to find enduring joy—much more joy than a vehicle that lasts for 500,000 miles? We find joy in Christ's enduring Word which lasts forever and cannot fail.

We have before us blessèdness, true happiness, which the world seeks after, but without Christ can never find. And so that we may be blessèd, truly happy and confident of God's favor, let us review the banner Beatitude: " **Blessèd are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God."**  There it is, blessèd are you if you are short on financial resources—**blessèd are you who are poor**.

And Scripture bears this up in many places. I now share with you a few of them.
> **Since there will always be poor people in the country, I order you: Be open-handed to poor and needy fellow Israelites in your country.**  (Deut. 15:11)
> **The LORD says: Do what is right and just; rescue anyone who is robbed from the oppressor's hands. Don't oppress or treat violently a stranger, orphan, or widow. Don't pour out innocent blood in this place.**  (Jer. 22:3)

Blessèd are not only the poor, but also the strangers, the orphans, and the widows.
> **"He gave justice to the poor and needy. Then all was well. Isn't this what it means to know Me?" asks the LORD.**  (Jer. 22:16)
> **This is what was wrong with your sister Sodom: she and her daughters were arrogant, overfed, and had undisturbed prosperity, but she didn't help the poor and the needy.**  (Ezek. 16:49)

We don't have to look hard, it's all through the Bible. God has His eye on the poor, and directs His care for the poor; blessèd are we who are poor to have God's constant, loving concern.

So far I have quoted to you from the Old Testament, and of course we have our Beatitude: " **Blessèd are you who are poor, for yours is the kingdom of God."**  But are we directed again in the New Testament to help the poor and needy? Yes, we are! We need look no farther than Galatians, chapter 2, where St. Paul writes, **"All they asked was that we remember the poor, and that I was eager to do"**  (Gal. 2:10).

Isn't that strange, though? It is easy to imagine that the poor among us are *not* favored by God. When we *are* the poor we are tempted to believe we have been forsaken by God. But what does God's Word say? The poor are and always will be blessèd, favored by God. God said it. I believe it. That settles it. For His Word endures forever.

*\[Transition]*  Now you may recall that the first Beatitude recorded in Matthew is slightly different: **"Blessèd are the poor** ***in spirit*, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven"**  (Matt. 5:3). We are directed by Christ's teaching to move from being poor, which some of us are, to being poor *in spirit*, which all of us are. The poor often beg for money or food or some other earthly need. But the poor in spirit beg for … forgiveness. "I have sinned against the Lord. Please forgive me!"

Scripture bears witness to our poverty of spirit in many places, but we are given one particular place today. We have the closing verses of our Old Testament lesson taken from Jeremiah, chapter 17:
> **Blessèd is the man who trusts in the LORD, whose trust is the LORD. He is like a tree planted by water, that sends out its roots by the stream, and does not fear when heat comes, for its leaves remain green, and is not anxious in the year of drought, for it does not cease to bear fruit.**  (Jer. 17:7–8)

But now look at the next two verses. You've heard this before.
> **The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately sick; who can understand it? I the LORD search the heart and test the mind, to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his deeds.**  (Jer. 17:9–10)

When the Lord searches my deceitful heart and tests my twisted mind, I find that I am, again, a beggar before God—I am poor in spirit.
**"God, be merciful to me, a sinner!"**  (Luke 18:13b) And merciful He is, ffor the sake of His Son, Jesus. Though we *\[altar]*  constantly drink God's forgiveness, while we are in our flesh we will find that we always come back begging for more. On a historical note, and for the record, when Martin Luther died, a scrap of paper was found on his body on which was written—what else?—"We are beggars, this is true."

How is it that our Lord Jesus is able to tell us beggars, **"Blessèd are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven"** ? Easy—but quite difficult, actually. For He was born of Mary to serve us with a most difficult assignment—*\[Gethsemane]*  " **Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from Me** (Luke 22:42a). Remove this Cross from Me, for it is very hard." But, belovèd in the Lord, blessèd are we because our Lord Jesus obediently went to the Cross to bear our sins and fulfill His Father's good and gracious will to save us sinners from death and hell. He can tell us we are blessèd because He has won full forgiveness for all of us by His wonderful act of sacrificial love which He accomplished for us on Calvary. Forgiveness is won and by the grace of the Spirit we are given a heart of flesh to replace our heart of stone (Ezek. 36:26).

Again, we don't have to look hard, it's all through the Bible. God has His eye on us sinners, and directs this Son to be our Savior; blessèd are we who are poor in spirit to have God's salvation in Son, Jesus!

Yes, belovèd in the Lord, we have much to rejoice over. **REJOICE IN THAT DAY, AND LEAP FOR JOY** when you believe that all is forgiven us for Christ's sake, no matter how the devil snorts and stamps. Though to the world we may appear defeated–though the world may hate us–nevertheless **REJOICE IN THAT DAY, AND LEAP FOR JOY**, for we have Christ's forgiveness, and His Word endures forever.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Jeremiah 17:9–10
\[9] The heart is deceitful above all things,
and desperately sick;
who can understand it?
\[10] “I the LORD search the heart
and test the mind,
to give every man according to his ways,
according to the fruit of his deeds.” (ESV)