---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 5, 2024
title: FOR WE SAW HIS STAR WHEN IT ROSE
occasion: Epipany (observed)
readings:
  - Is. 60:1-6
  - Eph. 3:1-12
  - Matt. 2:1-12
sermon_text: Matt. 2:1-12
bible_version: ESV
---

# FOR WE SAW HIS STAR WHEN IT ROSE

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Turn our hearts, O Spirit, to every Word that you have to tell us about our Lor and our God, Jesus. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, tomorrow, January 6, is Epiphany, but we observe it today. Christ is born and the season of Epiphany traditionally focuses on three events concerning Christ after His birth:
* *\[Christmas]*  the visit of wise men, who followed the star to Christ in Bethlehem
* *\[Baptism]*  Christ's Baptism in the Jordan River by John the Baptist
* Christ's first miracle, changing water into wine, performed at the wedding at Cana

These are the big three events of Christ's Epiphany. I would add a fourth to this list, and that is Christ being tempted by the devil right after His Baptism. Today we have before us in the Holy Gospel the visit of the wise men. **"After Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying, 'Where is he who has been born king of the Jews?' "**  The wise men—how many, we don't know, but they have brought gold, frankincnse, and myrrh—the wise men have come to King Herod, also known as Herod the Great.

Now is a good time as any to review some facts about Herod the Great, before he slaughters the innocents in Bethlehem (Matt. 2:16). My facts about Herod the Great come from Josephus, the Jewish historian born four years after the Crucifixion and Resurrection of our Lord. Josephus was not an eyewitness to our Lord or to Herod the Great, but he did write at the time the Gospels, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, were being written. According to Josephus, Herod was not a nice man. He became king of Judea by intrigue and murder and war and an alliance with Marc Antony, of Antony and Cleopatra fame. Herod ultimately overthrew the last Maccabean high priest and became ruler of Judea. Josephus also reports a glimpse into Herod's personal life. Herod was so jealous of his wife, Mariamme, that he gave orders that, should he be killed, Mariamme was to be executed.

So, when the wise men from the east come to Herod and ask **"Where is He who has been born king of the Jews?"**  it is more than likely that Herod expects a Maccabean uprising and will not hesitate to kill this king. It is no surprise at all that Herod will order the slaughter of the innocents in Bethlehem.

So much for Herod, though. Today I want to focus on the next words that are recorded from the lips of the wise men who are looking for the king of the Jews. **"FOR WE SAW HIS STAR WHEN IT ROSE and have come to worship Him."**  What about the wise men and the star? They have seen an unusual star and have followed this star from the east to Jerusalem. This same star will soon show them the way to Bethlehem to bring them to the Child Jesus, the true King of the Jews. It may be that back in Bible days people studied the stars more than we do today, when we're spending a lot of time at night looking at screens. Perhaps these wise men are experts of the stars—we would call them astronomers today. The Greek word for these men, however, is *magi*, which, of course, sounds like *magician*. They may be more astrologers than astronomers. And if they are truly magicians, they may be like Pharaoh's magicians in the time of Moses, who deal in satanic arts.

We do not know. But could it be *possible* that the Magi deal with satanic arts yet are in Judea looking for the King of the Jews, who, the apostle John tells us us, is born to destroy the works of the devil (1 John 3:8)? Yes, it is possible, for Christ is here to turn the world away from slavery to the devil.

And on this note, I want to bring to your remembrance the prophet Balaam from the Old Testament. More than Herod today I want to remember Balaam. Balaam, by the way, is not just one of those obscure prophets: Balaam is found from the beginning to the end of the Bible—he's found in Numbers *and* in Revelation. Balaam, in Numbers, is famous for blessing Israel while Israel was in the wilderness. (Do you remember Balaam?) **"The oracle of Balaam the son of Beor, the oracle of the man whose eye is opened, the oracle of him who hears the words of God, who sees the vision of the Almighty, falling down with his eyes uncovered: How lovely are your tents, O Jacob, your encampments, O Israel!"**  (Num. 24:3b–5) That is high praise for Israel from the lips of Balaam.

*\[Ask]*  But do you remember why Balaam was there in the wilderness in the first place, blessing the children of Israel? … Balaam had been summoned to the wilderness by Balak, king of Moab, to *curse* Israel, who had encamped in the plains of Moab (Num. 22:1–6). Balaam had been summoned from the east (Num. 22:5) to curse, but the LORD opened Balaam's mouth to *bless* Israel instead of curse.

And lest we be left to think that Balaam was a godly prophet, we read in Joshua, chapter 13, **"Balaam also, the son of Beor, the one who practiced divination, was killed with the sword by the people of Israel among the rest of their slain"**  (Josh. 13:22). Balaam was ultimately slain as an idolater by the Israelites that he had once blessed. And I had mentioned to you also that Balaam is mentioned in Revelation. *\[Ask]*  Do you remember what is written about him in Revelation? Our Lord Jesus Himself writes to the angel of the church in Pergamum, **"I have a few things against you: you have some there who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to put a stumbling block before the sons of Israel, so that they might eat food sacrificed to idols and practice sexual immorality"**  (Rev. 2:14), which brings us back to the wilderness. After blessing Israel, Balaam threw out the Spirit and incited the Israelites to commit abominations of idolatry.

Yet in those moments when the Spirit forced Balaam to speak God's own Word, back in the wilderness, Balaam did say this: **"I see him, but not now;**
**I behold him, but not near:** ***a star shall come out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel*; it shall crush the forehead of Moab**
**and break down all the sons of Sheth"**  (Num. 24:17). I does appear that the wise men are following the star prophesied by Balaam.

And, belovèd in the Lord, here a pattern is repeated. In the middle of swirling idolatry threatening to destroy God's chosen people, the Spirit opens the mouth of a false prophet to actually speak God's Word concerning the birth of the true King of God's people; His birth is marked by a star. The star, we hear in today's Holy Gospel, brings the wise men to worship the true King of the Jews: baby Jesus in Bethlehem. Balak did not want anything to do with it. The people of Israel, sadly, were soon drawn to worship the Baal of Peor (Num. 25:1–3).

Ahaz and Isaiah. **"Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and they shall call his name Immanuel (which means, God with us)."**  Immanuel—God with us *\[Crucifixion]*  to bear our sins and turn our hearts forever away from idols.

* Balak's kingdom is gone; his idols are worthless.
* Ahaz's kingdom is gone; his idols are worthless.
* Herod's kingdom is gone; his idols are worthless.
* Christ kingdom stands forever; He is the true God.


**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
## Old Testament
Isaiah 60:6
\[6] A multitude of camels shall cover you,
the young camels of Midian and Ephah;
all those from Sheba shall come.
They shall bring gold and frankincense,
and shall bring good news, the praises of the LORD. (ESV)
### Psalm
Psalm 72:1–15 (antiphon v. 18)
Of Solomon.
\[1] Give the king your justice, O God,
and your righteousness to the royal son!
\[2] May he judge your people with righteousness,
and your poor with justice!
\[3] Let the mountains bear prosperity for the people,
and the hills, in righteousness!
\[4] May he defend the cause of the poor of the people,
give deliverance to the children of the needy,
and crush the oppressor!


\[5] May they fear you while the sun endures,
and as long as the moon, throughout all generations!
\[6] May he be like rain that falls on the mown grass,
like showers that water the earth!
\[7] In his days may the righteous flourish,
and peace abound, till the moon be no more!


\[8] May he have dominion from sea to sea,
and from the River to the ends of the earth!
\[9] May desert tribes bow down before him,
and his enemies lick the dust!
\[10] May the kings of Tarshish and of the coastlands
render him tribute;
may the kings of Sheba and Seba
bring gifts!
\[11] May all kings fall down before him,
all nations serve him!


\[12] For he delivers the needy when he calls,
the poor and him who has no helper.
\[13] He has pity on the weak and the needy,
and saves the lives of the needy.
\[14] From oppression and violence he redeems their life,
and precious is their blood in his sight.


\[15] Long may he live;
may gold of Sheba be given to him!
May prayer be made for him continually,
and blessings invoked for him all the day! (ESV)
Psalm 72:18
\[18] Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
who alone does wondrous things. (ESV)
### Epistle

### Holy Gospel
Matthew 2:2
\[2] saying, “Where is he who has been born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him.” (ESV)
### Introit (Psalm 45:6–8a; antiphon: v. 17)
I will cause your name to be remembered in all gener- | ations;\*
therefore nations will praise you forever and | ever.
Your throne, O God, is forever and ever. The scepter of your kingdom is a scepter of up- | rightness;\*
you have loved righteousness and hated | wickedness.
Therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness beyond your com- | panions;\*
your robes are all fragrant with myrrh and aloes and | cassia.
**Glory be to the Father and | to the Son**\*
**and to the Holy | Spirit;**
**as it was in the be- | ginning,**  \*
**is now, and will be forever. | Amen.**
I will cause your name to be remembered in all gener- | ations;\*
therefore nations will praise you forever and | ever.
### Collect
O God, by the leading of a star You made known Your only-begotten Son to the Gentiles. Lead us, who know You by faith, to enjoy in heaven the fullness of Your divine presence; through the same Jesus Christ, our Lord, who lives and reigns with You and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever.
### Gradual (Psalm 117:1–2a; 96:8)
Praise the Lord, all | nations!\*
Extol him, all | peoples!
For great is his steadfast | love toward us,\*
and the faithfulness of the Lord endures for- | ever.
Ascribe to the Lord the glory | due his name;\*
bring an offering, and come in- | to his courts!
### Verse (Matthew 2:2b)
Alleluia. Where is he who has been born king of the Jews? For we saw his star when it rose and have come to worship him. Alleluia.
### Other Scripture
[Ephraim Syrus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ephrem_the_Syrian) saw the Magi following the star to be the fulfillment of this prophecy:

Numbers 24:17
\[17] I see him, but not now;
I behold him, but not near:
a star shall come out of Jacob,
and a scepter shall rise out of Israel;
it shall crush the forehead of Moab
and break down all the sons of Sheth. (ESV)

FYI Ephraim is venerated in
* Catholic Church
* Eastern Orthodox Church
* Church of the East
* Oriental Orthodox Churches
* Anglican Communion

In the Eastern Orthodox scheme of hagiography, Ephrem is counted as a Venerable Father (i.e., a sainted monk). His feast day is celebrated on 28 January. His Roman Catholic feast day of 9 June conforms to his date of death. For 48 years (1920–1969), it was on 18 June, and this date is still observed in the Extraordinary Form. Ephrem is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church (USA) on June 10.

The context of Balaam prophesying to Moab matches Isaiah prophesying to Ahaz that the virgin shall conceive and bear a son (Is. 7:14).

Isaiah 60:10
\[10] Foreigners shall build up your walls,
and their kings shall minister to you;
for in my wrath I struck you,
but in my favor I have had mercy on you. (ESV)