---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 4, 2026
title: MAY THE KINGS OF SHEBA AND SEBA BRING GIFTS.
occasion: Epiphany (observed)
readings:
  - Is. 60:1-6
  - Ps. 72:1-11
  - Eph. 3:1-12
  - Matt. 2:1-12
sermon_text: Ps. 72:1-11
bible_version: ESV
---

# MAY THE KINGS OF SHEBA AND SEBA BRING GIFTS.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  King Jesus, keep us safe in Your kingdom. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, there are many prophecies concerning the birth of Christ — many great ones — like Isaiah, chapter 9: **"For to us a Child is born, to us a Son is given; and the government shall be upon His shoulder, and His name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace"**  (Is. 9:6). Christ is King — **the government shall be upon His shoulder** — and so much more. But what was prophesied about *the wise men* who come to visit baby Jesus?

We have before us today's psalm: **"Give the King Your justice, O God, and Your righteousness to the Royal Son!"**  Some call it Psalm 72, which we are told was written by none other than King Solomon. *\[Psalm not printed in the St. Mark bulletin]*
> **Give the King your justice, O God, and your righteousness to the Royal Son! May He judge your people with righteousness, and your poor with justice! Let the mountains bear prosperity for the people, and the hills, in righteousness! May He defend the cause of the poor of the people, give deliverance to the children of the needy, and crush the oppressor!**

The psalm appointed for today is only the first eleven verses, and up to this point I have read to you the first four. But — you heard it for yourselves — the priority of the Righteous King is clear: **"May He judge your people with righteousness, and your poor with justice! … May He defend the cause of the poor of the people."**  God always has His eye on the poor. Also, over and over again, God speaks in strict judgment against the wicked ones who oppress the poor. The last person you want to be is someone who does harm to the poor — God will get you.

Continuing from the fifth verse,
> **May they fear You while the sun endures, and as long as the moon, throughout all generations! May He be like rain that falls on the mown grass, like showers that water the earth! In His days may the righteous flourish, and peace abound, till the moon be no more!**

The reign of the Righteous King is great for everyone — He's **like showers that water the earth**.

Continuing from the eighth verse, **"May He have dominion from sea to sea, and from** ***the River*** **to the ends of the earth!"**  *\[Ask]* For your information, whenever you see *the River* in the Bible, do you know which river that is? *The River*, when you read it in the Bible, means the Euphrates — basic Bible fact. Continuing from there,
> **May desert tribes bow down before Him, and His enemies lick the dust! May the kings of Tarshish and of the coastlands render Him tribute; MAY THE KINGS OF SHEBA AND SEBA BRING GIFTS! May all kings fall down before Him, all nations serve Him!**

Here we have foreign kings, the kings of not only Sheba and Seba, but also the king of Tarshish bringing tribute to the King of the Jews. *\[Ask]*  Is this a prophecy of *We three kings of orient are*? … For we have today's Holy Gospel:
> **Wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying, "Where is He who has been born King of the Jews? For we saw His star when it rose and have come to worship Him."**  (Matt. 2:1b–2)

*\[Ask]*  Is Psalm 72 a prophecy of the wise men coming to worship Jesus? Let's look at the details. On Christmas Eve I posted the following Bible question: How many wise men from the east came to bring gifts to baby Jesus? And I posted the answer to this question in last week's bulletin:
> The Bible does not say how many wise men came to visit the Christ Child. … The number of wise men is not specified. However, Matthew 2:11 states, **"They offered him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh."**  These three gifts gave rise to the tradition that three wise men from the east came to see baby Jesus.

So, we are not even sure about the number of wise men who came to worship Jesus; *tradition* says that three wise men came to worship Him.

But there is one detail that we do know from our Holy Gospel: the wise men came from *the east*. Psalm 72 mentions Tarshish. No one is sure where Tarshish is, but the best guess is that it lies to the west. The psalm also says, **"MAY THE KINGS OF SHEBA AND SEBA BRING GIFTS."**  Sheba and Seba are *to the south*. But the wise men, we know, came most certainly from *the east*. Therefore, we can be sure that the kings specified in Psalm 72 are *not* specifically the wise men who came to baby Jesus, bringing **gold and frankincense and myrrh**.

But, belovèd in the Lord, while we were being Bereans, examining the Scriptures (Acts 17:11), what did we learn for sure? **"May all kings fall down before Him,** ***all nations*** **serve Him!"**  Kings from the east, west, north, and south will serve the Lord Jesus — *all nations* will come to worship Him. Yet His reign is not an earthly kingdom but a heavenly kingdom. For He Himself will say,
> **My kingdom is not of this world. If My kingdom were of this world, My servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But** ***My kingdom is not from the world*.**  (John 18:36)

Belovèd in the Lord, let us ever bear in mind, looking forward to Lent, that Christ is born to bring His kingdom to all nations, yet His kingdom is not of this world. He spoke these Words as He was headed to *\[Crucifixion]*  the Cross to bear our sins. Belovèd in the Lord, the Christ Child brings a kingdom where He works the forgiveness of all of His subjects. He brings a kingdom where He *\[font]*  washes us clean of our sins. He brings a kingdom where He *\[altar]*  feeds us with His body and blood, and keeps us safe in His kingdom. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes