---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 12, 2025
title: I GIVE YOU WHAT IS MINE AND TAKE WHAT IS YOURS.
occasion: The Baptism of our Lord
readings:
  - Is. 43:1-7
  - Rom. 6:1-11
  - Luke 3:15-22
sermon_text: Luke 3:15-22
bible_version: ESV
---

# I GIVE YOU WHAT IS MINE AND TAKE WHAT IS YOURS.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us Spirit, to receive with thankfulness Christ's own holiness in exchange for our sin, and bless us, we pray, to accept with joyful hearts Your work to purify us in Jesus' holy name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have before us today Christ's Baptism. The Baptism of our Lord declares what wonderful things He has come to do for us. *\[Font]*  For our own Baptism in Christ's name we can hear our Lord declare a specific promise: **"He that believes and baptized shall be saved"**  (Mark 16:16). This is the promise of *our* Baptism. What we hear said at Christ's Baptism is the Father saying *to Christ* **"You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased."**  Though there is no *explicit* promise made directly to us at Christ's Baptism, the *implicit* promise made to us is breathtaking, and over this promise we especially rejoice this day.

We have John the Baptist baptizing sinners in the Jordan River.
> **You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come? Bear fruits in keeping with repentance.**  (Luke 3:7b–8a)

Still they come to him, repenting, and they are baptized—how many?—dozens?—hundreds?—thousands?—we are not told. At this point there are but two parties involved: John and the brood of vipers fleeing from God's wrath against their sin. Then the third party enters: Christ, **the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world** (John 1:29).

Between these three parties there is, however, a sharp distinction that puts two on one side and one on the other. Christ, the one, is alone—He alone is without sin. John the Baptist and the brood of vipers are two, for they are all sinners—John himself is also a sinner. The distinction is that Christ alone is different from all the others: He is alone holy—He is without sin; the sinners are not. So in case you needed a refresher on opposites, here are a pair of opposites: *\[indicate with hands]*  holy on one side and sinful on the other—Christ and everyone else. For it is written,
> **He committed no sin, neither was deceit found in his mouth. When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; when he suffered, he did not threaten, but continued entrusting himself to him who judges justly.**  (1 Peter 2:22–23)

John the Baptist famously recognizes the difference—that Jesus is without sin but that he is still a sinner—when he says to our Lord, **"I need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?"**  (Matt. 3:14b). Christ's answer declares to us God's plan: **"Let it be so now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness"**  (Matt. 3:15b). And so, belovèd in the Lord, we have before us God's plan: God's plan is for Christ and everyone else present **to fulfill all righteousness**—to do what is right in God's eyes.

*\[Transition]*  To do what is right—this is something with which we are constantly concerned: doing right. Either
* we want to do right or
* we want others to see that we've done right or
* we wish others would do right or
* we might recognize someone else for having done right.

There are many variations, but boing right is a huge deal for everyone—we are consumed with concern about doing right.

When we say *do right*, we often add a little and say that we *do right by* someone. For example, "Lebron did right *by the Cleveland fans*." Us Cavs fans think Lebron did right; the Warriors fans do not. We have at Christ's Baptism not only doing right but doing right *by His Father*, who declares His approval from heaven, **"You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased."**  Christ's Baptism clearly has His Father's approval. The Son has come to do right by the Father.

Belovèd in the Lord, here is what we have at Christ's Baptism that is right by the Father. Christ says to John the Baptist and to the brood of vipers, "I GIVE YOU WHAT IS MINE AND TAKE WHAT IS YOURS."

"I hope He doesn't take my money."

No, belovèd in the Lord, He doesn't need our money—He needs our hearts—He needs our hearts to believe that *He takes our sin and gives us His holiness in return.*  This, beyond all doubt, is the best deal known to man. Christ has no sin of His own to repent of, yet He lines up in public with the brood of vipers to be baptized by sinful John *as if* He did have sins to repent of—*as if* He were one of us. At His Baptism He is stepping in line to identify with us. *\[Crucifixion]*  But we will see that at the Cross He will step in line to absorb all our venom, all our sin, in his body. And in return we will receive *\[font]*  His water *\[altar]*  and His blood out of His body *for the forgiveness of our sins*—(His blood, as Julie and Nikki receive with us today). Belovèd in the Lord, for us, out of Christ's body, flows water and blood, which, by the grace of the Spirit, *make us holy* not by a trick but *by the full forgiveness of our sin*. Belovèd in the Lord, *\[Baptism]*  behold the Lamb of God who takes away our sin and gives us His own holiness through the forgiveness of our sins. "I GIVE YOU WHAT IS MINE AND TAKE WHAT IS YOURS."

*\[Conclusion]*  For this we can only rejoice, but what we have to look forward to is painful, for John the Baptist declares,
> **I baptize you with water, but he who is mightier than I is coming, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.** *\[Font]*  **He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.**  (Luke 3:16)

The fire part is painful, for by it the Spirit melts us down as a refiner's fire to separate and skim off the sinful dross that still lurks in our flesh. So be it, Lord! We want the holiness you give us.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
Christ's Baptism marks Him as our Redeemer who exchanges His holiness for our sin.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Here are verses about the second servant (Christ).

Isaiah 41:8–10
\[8] But you, Israel, my servant,
Jacob, whom I have chosen,
the offspring of Abraham, my friend;
\[9] you whom I took from the ends of the earth,
and called from its farthest corners,
saying to you, “You are my servant,
I have chosen you and not cast you off”;
\[10] fear not, for I am with you;
be not dismayed, for I am your God;
I will strengthen you, I will help you,
I will uphold you with my righteous right hand. (ESV)

Isaiah 42:1–4
\[1] Behold my servant, whom I uphold,
my chosen, in whom my soul delights;
I have put my Spirit upon him;
he will bring forth justice to the nations.
\[2] He will not cry aloud or lift up his voice,
or make it heard in the street;
\[3] a bruised reed he will not break,
and a faintly burning wick he will not quench;
he will faithfully bring forth justice.
\[4] He will not grow faint or be discouraged
till he has established justice in the earth;
and the coastlands wait for his law. (ESV)

Isaiah 43:1b
\[1b] “Fear not, for I have redeemed you;
I have called you by name, you are mine. (ESV)

Isaiah 43:4
\[4] Because you are precious in my eyes,
and honored, and I love you,
I give men in return for you,
peoples in exchange for your life. (ESV)

Ultimately, our Lord gives Himself in exchange for our life.

Isaiah 43:21
\[21] the people whom I formed for myself
that they might declare my praise. (ESV)

John 1:32–34
\[32] And John bore witness: “I saw the Spirit descend from heaven like a dove, and it remained on him. \[33] I myself did not know him, but he who sent me to baptize with water said to me, ‘He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is he who baptizes with the Holy Spirit.’ \[34] And I have seen and have borne witness that this is the Son of God.” (ESV)