---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 11, 2026
title: THE VOICE OF THE LORD IS OVER THE WATERS.
occasion: The Baptism of our Lord
readings:
  - Is. 42:1-9
  - Ps. 29
  - Rom. 6:1-11
  - Matt. 3:13-17
sermon_text: Ps. 29
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE VOICE OF THE LORD IS OVER THE WATERS.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank and praise You, Lord Jesus, for washing away our sin and baptizing us with the Holy Spirit. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today, of all days, we are face-to-face with these words from the baptismal rite: "Through the Baptism in the Jordan of Your beloved Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, You sanctified and instituted all waters to be a blessèd flood and a lavish washing away of sin." For today's Holy Gospel from Matthew, chapter 3 is the Baptism of our Lord by John the Baptist in the Jordan River.
> **Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him. John would have prevented Him, saying, "I need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?"**  (Matt. 3:13–14)

John, in this case, is John the Baptist; not the apostle John. Jesus traveled from Nazareth, presumably, all the way to the Jordan River where John was preaching and baptizing.
> **John appeared,**  \[it is written,] **baptizing in the wilderness and proclaiming a baptism** ***of repentance for the forgiveness of sins*. And all the country of Judea and all Jerusalem were going out to him and were being baptized by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.**  (Mark 1:4–5)

So, when John baptized our Lord, our Lord was not the only one who was there with him — this was no private baptism. There were many others — we don't know how many — who had already been baptized by John. Some may have left and gone home — we are not told. But blessèd are the ones who stayed, for they were about to see something. I bet that some were still hanging around and I suppose that there were other sinners in line behind our Lord, waiting to be baptized by John. This detail is important. Jesus was surrounded by sinners, even John the Baptist, who said, **"I need to be baptized by You, and do You come to me?"**

Not only was our Lord surrounded by sinners but they were confessing their sins, as David confessed his sins to Nathan. **"I have sinned against the LORD"**  (2 Sam. 12:13) is all David said to Nathan. **"I have sinned against the LORD"**  is all it takes for any of us to confess our sin to God. David would later write in Psalm 51, **"Against You, You only, have I sinned and done what is evil in Your sight"**  (Ps. 51:4a). That is also a confession of sin before God, and before God is all it takes. Take note that is not required to confess our sins for someone else to hear, though private confession is a salutary practice. And never divulging a sin confessed to you — telling no one, no, not a soul — is the proper Christian practice. *\[St. Mark only]*  I have confessed my sins to Pastor Neujahr, who visited us last week, but he'll never tell you what they were. *\[Both]*  If a fellow Christian comes to us confessing his sin, our ears are a tomb and no one is going to hear about it.

*\[Transition]*  The other thing we are told about the baptism of our Lord is that John was proclaiming this baptism to be **a baptism of** ***repentance*** **for the forgiveness of sins**. " ***Repent*, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand** (Matt. 3:2). Turn away from your sin and stop doing it, **for the kingdom of heaven is at hand**." What sins do I have to turn away from? *\[Understatment]*  Gee, let's pick a Commandment.
> The Second Commandment. **"You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God."**  What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not curse, swear, use satanic arts, lie, or deceive *by His name*, but call upon it in every trouble, pray, praise, and give thanks.

If I say I believe in God and I still sin — there, I've broken the Second Commandment — there's something to repent of. I brought God's name into my sin and I've sinned against the Second Commandment. That was easy — far too easy to sin against this Commandment.

*\[Transition]*  What sins do I have to turn away from? Plenty. *\[Ask]*  What sins did Jesus have to turn away from? None — He never sinned (Heb. 4:15). Yet He insisted that John baptize Him with the rest of us. *\[Ask]*  Belovèd in the Lord, can you picture the Good News? The sinless Christ is here for us sinners.

*\[Transition]*  Jesus appeared for us sinners but nowhere yet have we learned that Jesus sanctified and instituted *all* waters to be a blessèd flood and a lavish washing away of sin. Still, we do have the washing away of sin, for John proclaimed his baptism to be **a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins**. And we do have the kingdom of heaven at hand — we see heaven itself open at the baptism of our Lord.
> **When Jesus was baptized, immediately He went up from the water, and behold, the heavens were opened to Him, and He saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove and coming to rest on Him; \[17] and behold, a voice from heaven said, "This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased."**  (Matt. 3:16–17)

Belovèd in the Lord, THE VOICE OF THE LORD IS OVER THE WATERS, saying **"This is My beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased."**  THE VOICE OF THE LORD IS OVER THE WATERS, and He had told John, **"He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain, this is He who baptizes with the Holy Spirit"**  (John 1:33) — not only the forgiveness of sins but also the Holy Spirit to help us stop sinning. Our Lord gives us everything we need. THE VOICE OF THE LORD IS OVER THE WATERS, and the One who *\[font]*  baptizes us with the Holy Spirit will give this very command at the end of Matthew's Gospel: *\[Font]*
> **All authority in heaven and on earth has been given to Me. Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit.**  (Matt. 28:18–19)

*\[Crucifixion]*  He will back up His Baptism by working our forgiveness on the Cross. But, belovèd in the Lord, we now have all waters, made holy by Christ's command, to be a blessèd flood and a lavish washing away of sin in the name of Jesus, who lives and reigns with the Father and the Holy Spirit, one God, now and forever. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Russ's Baptism is scheduled for today.