---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: May 11, 2025
title: BELIEVE THE WORKS
occasion: 4th Sunday of Easter
readings:
  - Acts 20:17-35
  - Rev. 7:9-17
  - John 10:22-30
sermon_text: John 10:22-30
bible_version: ESV
---

# BELIEVE THE WORKS

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us heavenly Father, with Your Holy Spirit to believe in Your Son's works and be saved. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today we celebrate Mother's Day. We remember what Mom has done for us. You can go on an on about what your mom did for you. I can go on and on with what my mom did for me.
* She fed me.
* She clothed me—she even knit socks and sweaters for me.
* She loved me and still does.
* And—did I mention that she fed me?—she made gingerbread cookies for me.

If you haven't figured it out yet, those gingerbread cookies are my sweet spot. Since Mom has moved to Cleveland, I have made it my business to learn how to make the dough, how to roll it out, how to cut the cookies out of the dough and lay them on the sheet, and how to bake them because I'm afraid she can't won't them forever. Would you believe it?—I've even made gingerbread cookies for her. And I've wondered: could I ever make for Mom all the gingerbread cookies she has made for me? The answer is: *no way*. That's even a silly question. It would just be way too big of a job.

*\[Illustration]*  So, for the sake of illustration, if an impostor came to me and said, "I'm your mother," she would have to prove it. "Go ahead and make me some gingerbread cookies," and she would never make enough—over all those *years*. "Go ahead an love me," and she would never love me enough. "Go ahead an clothe me. Go ahead and feed me. Make my lunch when I come home from school. Change my diapers. Give birth to me. Carry me for nine months." It would never be enough. Thanks, Mom! I only have one Mom, I know what she's done for me, and she's the only one. BELIEVE THE WORKS—you will know from her works who my mother is.

*\[Transition]*  In our Holy Gospel today, from John, chapter 10, the Good Shepherd chapter, we hear this famous verse from the lips of our Lord Jesus: **"I and the Father are one."**  This is one of the places in the Gospels, like calling Himself Lord of the Sabbath (Matt. 12:8), where Christ flat-out says He is God: **"I and the Father are one."**  This man born of Mary is also true God, as the angel Gabriel had told her:
> \[Mary,] **you will conceive in your womb and bear a son, and you shall call his name Jesus. He will be great and will be called the Son of the Most High.**  (Luke 1:31–32a)

It is this claim that Jesus made of Himself, that He is God, the Son of God, that infuriated the Jewish scribes and elders so that they condemned Him to die (Matt. 26:63–66). And again, we have before us today our Lord's claim, **"I and the Father are one"** —He says this after He has told us how He will take perfect care of us:
> **My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me. I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.**

This is a huge claim, that He will take perfect care of us that no one, not even the devil, will snatch us out of His hand *and* we will live forever. This is a gigantic claim, that He and the Father are one God. In the verses that follow today's Holy Gospel, let us hear Him drive His point home.
> **The Jews picked up stones again to stone \[Jesus]. \[He] answered them, “I have shown you many good works from the Father; for which of them are you going to stone Me?" The Jews answered Him, "It is not for a good work that we are going to stone you but for blasphemy, because you, being a man, make yourself God." Jesus answered them, "Is it not written in your Law, 'I said, you are gods'?"**

(This is a quote from Psalm 82.)
> **"If he called them gods to whom the Word of God came—and** ***Scripture cannot be broken*—do you say of Him whom the Father consecrated and sent into the world, 'You are blaspheming,' because I said, 'I am the Son of God'? If I am not doing the works of My Father, then do not believe Me;** ***but if I do them*, even though you do not believe me, BELIEVE THE WORKS, that you may know and understand that the Father is in me and I am in the Father."**  (John 10:31–38)

Believe the healings, believe the casting out of demons, believe raising the dead:
* believe raising the son of the widow at Nain from the dead (Luke 7:11–15);
* believe raising Jairus's daughter from the dead (Mark 5:39–42);
* believe raising Lazarus from the dead (John 11:43–44).

Do you believe the Father is in Jesus and Jesus is in the Father? *\[Gethsemane]*  Believe Jesus' prayer to His Father in Gethsemane: **"Not My will, but Yours, be done"**  (Luke 22:42b). Believe His love for his Father *\[Crucifixion]*  and believe His love for us to suffer and bear our sins according to the Scriptures: **"I will remove the iniquity of this land in a single day"**  (Zech. 3:9b). Believe that the sky turned dark and the earth trembled and more of the dead rose when Christ removed the iniquity of the land in a single day (Matt. 27:45–53). The sins of man gone in a single day—anyone else gonna do that? Belovèd in the Lord, BELIEVE THE WORKS of Christ.

And in case you think that He was crucified, dead, and buried, and that's all there is to it, Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia! I preached it two weeks ago and I'll preach it again today:
* Our Lord's Resurrection proves that death is not the last word for Christ—it is not the last word for Christ and it is not the last word for anyone who believes in Him.
* The wages of sin is death (Rom. 6:23) and our Lord's Resurrection proves that there is no trace of our sins remaining on the Son of God who bore them all—no trace of sin on Christ *and* no trace of sin on anyone who believes in Him.
* Our Lord's Resurrection—the Scripture has been fulfilled! (Ps. 16; Acts 2:24–28)—proves that all is won for Christ's cause, and there is nothing to doubt about what He says.

Anyone else gonna do that? Christ is the Son of God and He and the Father are one—Alleluia! And if you doubt the Words, BELIEVE THE WORKS: He is the Christ, the Son of the living God (Matt. 16:16), and in His name alone we have life. There are those who question His works—*we* are even free to question His works—the Scriptures and the Spirit will testify, and so will archaeology, that He has done it (Ps. 22:31b).

And when the false christs appear, as we are warned (Matt. 24:24), watch their works and compare them to Christ's Works, and compare them to Scripture, which cannot be broken. We will recognize the false christ and be wise to steer clear.

There is one false christ to be especially wary of: ourselves. When, by the grace of the Spirit, we BELIEVE THE WORKS of Christ, let us never wonder, "Can I ever make up for all that Christ has done for me?" The answer is: *no way*. It's a silly question. But we can believe in Him, and listen to Him, and love one another as He has commanded us (John 13:34–35).

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
"If God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is alive and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, will he not much more clothe you, O you of little faith?" (Matt. 6:30)

Revelation 7:17
\[17] For the Lamb in the midst of the throne will be their shepherd,
and he will guide them to springs of living water,
and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.” (ESV)

It's Mothers Day!