---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: August 17, 2025
title: THE GOSPEL OF PEACE BRINGS DIVISION.
occasion: 10th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Jer. 23:16-29
  - Heb. 11:17-12:3
  - Luke 12:49-56
sermon_text: Luke 12:49-56
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE GOSPEL OF PEACE BRINGS DIVISION.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Live in us, we pray, Lord Jesus, that we walk in Your light always. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, in the Holy Gospel today our Lord Jesus says that He comes to bring division, not peace. Wait a minute! We are well aware that the Bible proclaims *peace* in Jesus' name. For Isaiah prophesied, **"To us a child is born, to us a Son is given; and the government shall be upon His shoulder, and His name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father,** ***Prince of Peace*"**  (Is. 9:6). *\[Humor]*  (Now we have Christmas in August.) *\[Christmas]*  At the birth of Christ the angels proclaimed to the shepherds, **"Glory to God in the highest, and on earth** ***peace*** **among those with whom he is pleased!”** (Luke 2:14) And what is it that that our Lord could not stop saying to His disciples *\[Resurrection]*  after He rose from the dead? **"Peace be with you"** —repeated three times in John, chapter 20 (John 20:19, 21, 26).

You may be quite familiar with all these proclamations of peace, so our Holy Gospel may come as a surprise. Our Lord Jesus declares,
> **Do you think that I have come to give peace on earth? No, I tell you, but rather division. For from now on in one house there will be five divided, three against two and two against three. They will be divided, father against son and son against father, mother against daughter and daughter against mother, mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law and daughter-in-law against mother-in-law.**

Not only do we have division instead of peace, but our Lord tells us concretely that for some of us, our families will be in conflict, which is the last thing any of us wants.

*\[Transition]*  Now, does it not sound like Jesus is contradicting Himself? He has been proclaimed the Prince of Peace and now He's saying, "No, I'm not the Prince of Peace: I'm the Duke of Division." That is a contradiction. How can Jesus bring both division and and peace? At this point, some may want to interpret the Bible by picking one and throwing away the other to get rid of the logical contradiction—Jesus cannot be both for peace and for division at the same time. It's either one or the other, but not both.

The correct interpretation, however, *is* both. *Let Jesus speak and we will listen* is always the best route. For Jesus to bring both peace and division is a paradox—the truth is in the paradox. And now I want to present to you another paradox—one thing Jesus tells us in the Holy Gospel and the other is something that happened today. So let us turn again to the Holy Gospel.
> **I came to cast** ***fire on the earth*, and would that it were already kindled!** ***I have a baptism to be baptized with*, and how great is My distress until it is accomplished!**

Christ's baptism with which He is to be baptized is a baptism by fire. **"I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how great is My distress until it is accomplished!"** This can be *\[Crucifixion]*  none other than the Cross—our Lord's innocent suffering and death bearing our sins. And it has been accomplished—the work of winning our forgiveness was won when our Lord bowed His head saying, **"It is finished"**  (John 19:30).

Also, we cannot hear these words from our Lord about fire and His baptism and not take into account the proclamation of John the Baptist concerning Christ.
> **I baptize you with water, but He who is mightier than I is coming, the strap of whose sandals I am not worthy to untie.** ***He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.***  **His winnowing fork is in His hand, to clear his threshing floor and to gather the wheat into His barn, but the chaff He will burn with unquenchable fire.**  (Luke 3:16–17)

Fire here, fire there, fire everywhere! The unquenchable fire is the fire of hell. When Christ returns as judge, He will sentence the *unbelieving* world to the eternal torment of hell—terrible but true. But let us remember that the unbelieving world was sentenced to drown and die in the Flood, while *Noah and his family, eight souls in all* were saved *\[font]*  by water, prefiguring … why, yes, our Lord did baptize Piret this morning. What we have before us is a paradox: *\[Crucifixion]*  Christ's baptism by fire on the one hand, and *\[font]*  Piret's gentle, easy Baptism by water that washes away all her sins and gives her Christ's Spirit on the other. One horrible suffering and dying on the Cross on one hand—one gentle washing with water and the word (Eph. 5:25) on the other. The truth is that this is how Jesus saves us from sin, death, and hell. Thank you, Lord Jesus, that the easy part is for us!

Which brings us to ***the Holy Spirit and fire*** with which Christ baptizes us. Now *this* fire is *\[count 3]*  much, much, much better than the fire Christ endured on the Cross. Alleluia! The fire that we experience has to do with our Baptism in the name *\[count 3]*  of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit (Matt. 28:19; Acts 2:38). Our Baptism into Christ is the birth from above by water and the Spirit (John 3:5). The work of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, the Bible tells us, is a refiner's fire (Mal. 3:2–3)—Christ's fire which purifies us of sin at every opportunity—give Him the opportunity!—pray for the Spirit (Luke 11:13)—pray for Jesus to come in our hearts and refine away our sin and He'll do it!

*\[Conclusion]*  But, sadly, here comes the division of which Christ speaks.
> **This is the judgment: the light has come into the world, and people loved the darkness rather than the light because their works were evil. For everyone who does wicked things hates the light and does not come to the light, lest his works should be exposed.**  (John 3:19–20)

Lord Jesus, let us always live in Your light unto life everlasting.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
**"I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father except through me"**  (John 14:6).

Jesus's baptism with fire vs. Piret's Baptism with water and the Spirit (John 3:5).

Take the denominations, for example—not the Sunnis and the Shiites—take *Christian* denominations, for example, and it's a shame. For God tells us in His Word that Christ's Church is *one* body.
> **For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body, though many, are one body, so it is with Christ. For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—Jews or Greeks, slaves or free—and all were made to drink of one Spirit.**  (1 Cor. 12:12–13)

So the existence of denominations is *not* the division that Christ speaks of in the Holy Gospel.