---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: June 26, 2025
title: DID THESE GUYS REALLY GET ALONG?
occasion: Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul
readings:
  - Acts 15:1-21
  - Gal. 2:1-10
  - Matt. 16:13-19
sermon_text: Matt. 16:13-19
bible_version: ESV
---

# DID THESE GUYS REALLY GET ALONG?
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank you, Lord, for being the One for us to believe in and be saved. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today, in the church calendar, is the Feast of St. Peter and St. Paul—they are remembered together on the same day, not on separate days.

My first thought on remembering the apostles is that Paul wrote thirteen of the twenty-seven books of the New Testament. So, for good measure, let's list the books of the New Testament written by Paul. They all come one after the other in the Bible.

|               |                 |           |
| ------------- | --------------- | --------- |
| Romans        | Philippians     | 2 Timothy |
| 1 Corinthians | Colossians      | Titus     |
| 2 Corinthians | 1 Thessalonians | Philemon  |
| Galatians     | 2 Thessalonians |           |
| Ephesians     | 1 Timothy       |           |

were all written by Paul by inspiration of the Holy Spirit. *\[Ask]*  Now, who can tell me which books of the Bible did Peter write?

|         |         |
| ------- | ------- |
| 1 Peter | 2 Peter |

So, comparing apples to apples of who wrote books of the New Testament, Peter is a midget next to Paul. Isn't that interesting?

Of course, there is much recorded about Peter in the Gospels, and nothing about Paul, so Peter's stature grows—other than Peter is best known for having denied our Lord three times.
> **After a little while the bystanders came up and said to Peter, "Certainly you too are one of them, for your accent betrays you." Then \[Peter] began to invoke a curse on himself and to swear, "I do not know the man." And immediately the rooster crowed. And Peter remembered the saying of Jesus, "Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times." And he went out and wept bitterly.**  (Matt. 26:73–75)

(I believe there may be a rooster at the bottom of the Gethsemane window. This is to remember Peter's denial or our Lord.) Peter knew right away that he had sinned against the Lord. What's wonderful about this is that Peter appears to have repented quickly, for it is written, **"He went out and wept bitterly."**  No doubt, these words of our Lord came to Peter's mind: **"Everyone who acknowledges Me before men, I also will acknowledge before My Father who is in heaven, but whoever denies Me before men, I also will deny before My Father who is in heaven"**  (Matt. 10:32–33).

But here we find that Peter and Paul have much in common. Paul is also well-known for having sinned against the Lord—Paul, once known as Saul, was among the early *persecutors* of Christians. Saul watched with approval as the first Christian martyr, Stephen, was stoned.
> **They cast \[Stephen] out of the city and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.**  (Acts 7:58)

This Saul, again, is *the* apostle Paul. Horrible—what Paul and Peter have in common that they are documented, horrible sinners, and not that different from you and me.

*\[Transition]*  But, belovèd in the Lord, for those who are gripped by our sins or should our former sins come back to haunt us, we believe that we are saved by faith in Jesus, *our Savior from sin, death, and the devil*. Our faith in our Savior is confessed perfectly by Peter in today's Holy Gospel:
> **\[Jesus] said to \[the disciples], "But who do you say that I am?" Simon Peter replied, "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God." And Jesus answered him, "Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven."**

This faith is revealed to each one of us by our Father in heaven through the mouth of a preacher—someone to proclaim to us that **Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God**. We hear the Good News and the Holy Spirit is there to fix it in our hearts. Since we've been paying extra attention to the Nicene Creed in Bible study, and will study the Athanasian Creed today, the Son of the Living God is the second person of the Trinity: Father, *Son*, and Holy Spirit–the *Son* of the Living God. We believe the Jesus is *the* Son; He is true God.

But, belovèd in the Lord, how can the true God die for our sins? For God cannot die—He is the *Living* God. But the Son came down from heaven and *made sure* He became one of us by being conceived by the Holy Spirit in the virgin Mary and *\[Christmas]*  by being born as one of us. *Now* He can die bearing our sins, … *\[Crucifixion]* and He did. Thank you, Lord Jesus! The punishment that brought us peace was upon You (Is. 53:5).

Belovèd in the Lord, the One who died bearing our sins is the Christ, the Son of the Living God. And this time it is Paul who says in Romans, chapter 10,
> **If you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord and believe in your heart** *\[Resurrection]*  **that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved. For with the heart one believes and is justified, and with the mouth one confesses and is saved. For the Scripture says, "Everyone who believes in him will not be put to shame."**  (Rom. 10:9–11)

For **Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God**. Here we can say that Paul and Peter agree: confess that Jesus is Lord and we are saved—even death cannot put us to shame. *\[Instruct]*  If you would turn at this point to your bulletin cover, that is an icon of Peter and Paul hugging—isn't that sweet? I would say that on this point—confess that Jesus is Lord and we are saved—Peter and Paul and you and I are all hugging.

*\[Transition]*  But the question on the bulletin cover is, "DID THESE GUYS REALLY GET ALONG?" Let's turn to our Bibles and investigate. Our Epistle reading today is from Galatians, chapter 2, verses 1–10:

> **From those who seemed to be influential (what they were makes no difference to me; God shows no partiality)—those, I say, who seemed influential added nothing to me.**  (Gal. 2:6)


Paul and Barnabas have come to Jerusalem to meet with the apostles themselves, Peter being one of the leading apostles. It does not matter to Paul who they are—they add nothing to him.
> **On the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the gospel to the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been entrusted with the gospel to the circumcised (for he who worked through Peter for his apostolic ministry to the circumcised worked also through me for mine to the Gentiles), and when James and Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars, perceived the grace that was given to me, they gave the right hand of fellowship to Barnabas and me, that we should go to the Gentiles and they to the circumcised.**  (Gal. 2:7–9)

We learn of a division of labor here, that Paul and Barnabas should preach to the Gentiles—which they will—they're going on a big missionary journey—while James and Peter and John should preach to the Jews, presumably in and around Jerusalem. What's peculiar about this is that it was Peter, not Paul, who was the first missionary to the Gentiles: it was *Peter* who had preached to the household of Cornelius in Acts, chapter 10.

Could it be that Paul is stepping on Peter's toes? Wait till you hear what's in the verses directly after today's Epistle lesson:
> **But when Cephas came to Antioch, I opposed him to his face, because he stood condemned. For before certain men came from James, he was eating with the Gentiles; but when they came he drew back and separated himself, fearing the circumcision party. And the rest of the Jews acted hypocritically along with him, so that even Barnabas was led astray by their hypocrisy. But when I saw that their conduct was not in step with the truth of the gospel, I said to Cephas before them all, "If you, though a Jew, live like a Gentile and not like a Jew, how can you force the Gentiles to live like Jews?"**  (Gal. 2:11–14)

In other words, Peter was in error for shying away from eating Gentile food with Gentiles because everything can be eaten by Christians with thanksgiving and with the word of God and prayer (1 Tim. 4:4). Peter was in error and Paul corrected him in front of everyone! Did Paul step on Peter's toes? Yes, and thank God he did.

Belovèd in the Lord, DID THESE GUYS REALLY GET ALONG? Not always, even after they both believed and were honored apostles. It was that way with Paul and Peter, it will also be that way from time to time with you and me and each other. But we are ever safe, and hugging each other, in our faith that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Peter and Paul never really appear together except in Acts 15 and Gal. 2:14.