---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: April 13, 2025
title: HE SAVED OTHERS; LET HIM SAVE HIMSELF.
occasion: Palm Sunday
readings:
  - Deut. 32:36-39
  - Phil. 2:5-11
  - Luke 23
sermon_text: Luke 23
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE SAVED OTHERS; LET HIM SAVE HIMSELF.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]* We thank and praise You, Lord Jesus, for saving us to the bitter, blessèd end. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord,
> **Lift up your heads, O gates! And be lifted up, O ancient doors, that the King of glory may come in. Who is this King of glory? The LORD, strong and mighty, the LORD, mighty in battle!**  (Ps. 24:7–8)

Our Lord Jesus, humble and mounted on a donkey (Zech. 9:9), rides into Jerusalem—humble, yet mighty. He is indeed mighty in battle for He rides into Jerusalem to do final battle with the devil. He's fighting the devil for us. He's God—He could destroy the devil in a snap, but chooses to do it differently. He's riding into Jerusalem sharing our own human flesh to do final battle with the devil. As we heard this past Wednesday, Satan himself will enter into Judas on the Wednesday of Holy Week—Satan will do all he can to destroy the Christ. And our Lord will die, for He does ride into Jerusalem sharing our human flesh, which is able to die.

One week from today, we will hear very clearly whether Satan was able to destroy the Christ: No, not at all. For Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!

Though today is Palm Sunday, notice that today's Holy Gospel is a lengthy reading of Christ's Passion. ( *Passion* means *suffering*.) This reading has found its way into the lectionary because for centuries Christians have found it important to publicly read through Christ's Passion during Lent. Even though we do have a Good Friday service to hear Christ's Passion, many Christians do not attend Good Friday services. And if they miss Good Friday, when will they hear the Passion read at church? Aha! Why not read Christ's Passion Palm Sunday? And here we have it: Passion Sunday. Christ enters into Jerusalem to do a whole lot of suffering for us.

My remarks today will be short. As we listen to the Holy Gospel, the Holy Spirit moves our hearts to believe what the prophet Isaiah foretold about the Christ's Passion. **"He was despised and rejected by men"**  (Is. 53:3a). Isaiah foretold what we hear in Christ's Passion: **"The rulers scoffed at \[Christ], saying, 'HE SAVED OTHERS; LET HIM SAVE HIMSELF, if he is the Christ of God, his Chosen One!' "**

From Isaiah we hear,
> **He was despised and rejected by men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief; and as One from whom men hide their faces He was despised, and we esteemed Him not. Surely He has borne** ***our griefs*** **and carried** ***our sorrows*; yet we esteemed Him stricken, smitten by God, and afflicted. But He was pierced** ***for our transgressions*; He was crushed** ***for our iniquities*;**

Isaiah foretold that He would die not for His own sins, for He had no sins of his own (Heb. 4:15), but *for our sins*.
> **upon Him was the chastisement that brought us peace, and with His wounds we are healed.**

That is, our sins are fully forgiven and we are at peace with God.
> **All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned—every one—to his own way; and the LORD has laid** ***on Him*** **the iniquity of us all.**  (Is. 53:3–6)

When it comes to our sin, it's all on Jesus. This prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled by Christ's Passion—He suffers for our sins.

But note that Christ is mocked when He hangs on the Cross: " **HE SAVED OTHERS; LET HIM SAVE HIMSELF**. C'mon, Jesus of Nazareth, save Yourself." When we are mocked we have the opportunity to show our doubters that we are not as bad as they say we are. Christ has the opportunity to instantly put these rulers in their place by popping out the nails and stepping down from the Cross and putting these guys in a headlock. Belovèd in the Lord, notice, though, that He stays on the Cross—crucified, yet glorified.

Glorified because next to Him *\[Crucifixion]*  hangs the thief on the right, who's watching Jesus die. Do you see the stained glass window? His face is turned toward our Lord and he's watching Him die. By the grace of the Spirit the thief sees that Jesus, crucified with him, is his friend *who is able to help him*. And the thief or the right says, " **Jesus, remember me when You come into Your kingdom.**  Take me with You—I want to go to where You're going."

This is the thief's confession of faith. It's shorter than the Apostles' Creed but here it is: **"Jesus, remember me when You come into Your kingdom."**  This thief, receiving the just punishment for his sin, sees Jesus and believes in Him! We are not aware of any good deed this man has ever done; we only know that he's a criminal. He may be a sinner, … but, belovèd in the Lord, … he believes in Jesus.

**"And \[Jesus] said to him, 'Truly, I say to you, today you will be with Me in paradise.' "**  The thief believes in Jesus and is saved—his sins are forgiven and he is headed to heaven with Jesus. Remember that our Lord could have popped those nails and saved Himself, but instead He kept going and saved one more sinner.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Since the Holy Gospel is all of Luke 23, keep the sermon short.