---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 29, 2026
title: THE STONE THAT THE BUILDERS REJECTED HAS BECOME THE CORNERSTONE
occasion: Palm Sunday
readings:
  - Is. 50:4-9a
  - Ps. 118:19-29
  - Phil. 2:5-11
  - Matt. 27:11-66
sermon_text: Ps. 118:19-29
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE STONE THAT THE BUILDERS REJECTED HAS BECOME THE CORNERSTONE

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, grant us Your Spirit to believe that Your Son, Jesus, has lifted the burden our our sins in full. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, our psalm for today in not an entire psalm but the last eleven verses of a psalm, the last verse being **"Oh give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; for His steadfast love endures forever!"**  The first verse of the psalm also happens to be **"Oh give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; for His steadfast love endures forever!"**

This verse, the beginning and end of Psalm 118, thanks God for His steadfast love. It is noteworthy that this verse echoes throughout Psalm 136 as well. **"Oh give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; for His steadfast love endures forever!"**  appears also elsewhere in the Bible, word-for-word (1 Chron. 16:8–34; 2 Chron. 20:21).

If you were trained on the King James Bible, you learned it this way: **"O give thanks unto the LORD; for He is good: for His** ***mercy*** **endureth for ever."**  Take note — and you may have noticed — that *mercy* in the King James is translated *steadfast love* in our English Standard Bible, but behind both words stands this single Hebrew Word, *hesed*, which means *God's love*, which is very, very great toward us in Christ Jesus.

We behold God's steadfast love in what He created — we are given everything that keeps us alive — food, air, water — we receive it out of God's love. But we particularly behold God's steadfast love *in action* as we hear from the Gospels the mighty works of our Lord Jesus Christ which He does for us. This, by the way, puts special attention on the Gospels — on Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. As for today, Palm Sunday, all four Gospels report that our Lord rides into Jerusalem on the colt of a donkey.
> **The next day the large crowd that had come to the feast \[of the Passover] heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem. So they took branches of palm trees and went out to meet Him, crying out, "** ***Hosanna!***  **Blessed is He who comes in the name of the Lord, even the King of Israel!" And Jesus found a young donkey and sat on it, just as it is written, "Fear not, daughter of Zion; behold, your King is coming, sitting on a donkey's colt!"**  (John 12:12–15; Zech. 9:9)

Riding on a donkey's colt — so what? Do you call *that* a mighty work? Yes, we do, and we also call it God's steadfast love. The Bible reveals to us over and over again that God *chooses* to perform His mighty works through that which is weak and despised by the world. Christ chooses to show His power in those things that are weak and despised (1 Cor. 1:28). So, riding in mildly on a donkey's colt instead of a warhorse is exactly how He likes to work. The crowd on Palm Sunday cries, *Hosanna!* , which means *Help!*  or *Save, I pray!*  This is what the people cry out — *Save, I pray!*  — and this, belovèd in the Lord, is precisely the mighty work our Lord rides into Jerusalem to do: to save us from *big* trouble.

The Bible depicts Christ's salvation in many ways. For example, Christ defeats the devil for us (Matt. 4:1–11; 1 John 3:8; 4:4). The textbook satanic attack is to deceive us to get us to sin and then to work on us — to get in our heads that we despair of our sins. Satan would convince us that our sin is too great and we are crushed under the weight. That is big trouble. You and I experience this weight as guilt — that awful, guilty feeling.

Judas Iscariot, tragically, will perish in his guilt without Christ's salvation (Matt. 27:3–5). *\[Slowly]*  Judas put an end to his own life *not* believing that Jesus was able to lift the burden of his guilt.

Belovèd in the Lord, Jesus *is* able — God *is* able — and we will take hold of this as we pray today's psalm: **"THE STONE THAT THE BUILDERS REJECTED HAS BECOME THE CORNERSTONE."**  The cornerstone of which we pray is Jesus Christ Himself, and we, His Church, are the building of *living* stones built on Him (1 Peter 2:4) — forgiven and living in His Name. Today we pay attention to the cornerstone: it is the bottommost stone of the foundation of the building — it bears *the weight* of the building. *\[Point]*  Think of the weight supported by the cornerstone of this church: masonry, lumber, people, piping are all pressing down on the cornerstone. But look! The cornerstone does not give way. The cornerstone bears the weight of the building as Jesus Christ bears the guilt of our sin.

*\[Illustration]*  We can make a mental exercise of it: what is the weight of our sin? As much as a bus? As much as this church? As much as the earth? I might say that the guilt my own sin is quite heavy. Add to that your sin. Add to that all the sin that went on this week in the neighborhood. Add to that all the sin that was committed this week while war was being waged in various parts of the world — the lying, the killing. Add to that the week before that. Add to that the week before that … and we have just gone though a mental exercise about the guilt of our sin when we put it all together. I would say that it is fair to say our guilt is greater than we can understand.

But what does the Bible tell us about the guilt of our sin? We have David — King David's sin is as good a place to start as any. He coveted his neighbors wife — that's a sin in his heart. Then he committed adultery with her — that's a sin against his body and hers — the guilt piles on. Then he arranged for Uriah, her husband, to be killed in battle (2 Sam. 11). I'm bringing up these details that we may consider what it is to bear the weight of David's sin since he is the textbook case from the Bible. The weight is great!

In the next chapter of the Bible, 2 Samuel, chapter 12, Nathan confronts David with his sin, and
> **David said to Nathan, "I have sinned against the LORD." And Nathan said to David, "** ***The LORD also has put away your sin*; you shall not die."**  (2 Sam. 12:13)

Wait! That's it? Quite simply, "It is not for you, David, to put away your sin. The LORD Himself has put it away; you shall not die, but you shall live."

"But how did the LORD put away my sin?"

"How He put it away you may one day understand in part, but He did remove your sin as far as the east is from the west. Do you believe this?"

"Yes, Nathan, I do believe that the LORD did this for me, a poor, miserable sinner."

And by faith in Jesus the burden is instantly lifted. Belovèd in the Lord, we do best not so much to make a mental exercise of the burden of our sin that Jesus bore for us — not to try to grasp the enormity of our sin — what it did to us — what it did to others. It's just too much. However, we are to confess our sin before God. By the grace of the Holy Spirit we are to repent of it, like David did. But after that we are to remember the Word of the angel Gabriel to Mary, that **nothing will be impossible with God** (Luke 1:37). His steadfast love toward us is so great that **He gave His only Son, that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have eternal life** (John 3:16). And the weight of the the guilt of our sin is lifted as we have cried out to Jesus to do for us — *Save, I pray!*

Jesus is *able* to bear our sin and carry it away. He is *only One* able to be the Cornerstone of His Church because *only He* is strong enough to hold us up and say, "Forgiven!" On this point we remember the clear testimony of the Bible that Christ is not just man, but is *Immanuel*, *God with Us*, so that He *is* able to bear our sin, for **nothing will be impossible** ***with God*.**  *\[Crucifixion]*  Jesus *has* borne our sins *\[Resurrection]*  and conquered death. Alleluia!

We cannot fully understand the weight of burden He bore, but we'll keep in our hearts this Holy Week what the Bible testifies of God's steadfast love toward us. *\[Gethsemane]*  In the Garden of Gethsemane, **being in agony \[Jesus] prayed more earnestly; and His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down to the ground** (Luke 22:44). And from there the burden got heavier.
> **There came a crowd, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He drew near to Jesus to kiss Him, but Jesus said to him, "Judas, would you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?"**
> **… Then all the disciples left Him and fled.**  (Luke 22:47–48; Matt. 26:56b)

As Jesus endures denial, betrayal, shame, and suffering, His steadfast love does not waver — not His love for us and not His love for His Father, either. For a moment He is forsaken by His Father as He bears our sin — **"My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me"**  (Mark 15:34; Ps. 22:1), the Fourth Word from the Cross that we will hear on Good Friday. And when the burden is lifted and our guilt it gone He says, **"Father, into Your hands I commit my spirit!"**  (Luke 23:46), His Seventh and final Word from the Cross. We hear it, we believe it, and we **give thanks to the LORD, for He is good; for His steadfast love endures forever!**  **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep our hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
The account of Palm Sunday is recorded in all four Gospels: Matthew 21:1-11, Mark 11:1-11, Luke 19:28-40, and John 12:12-19.

Psalm 118:18
\[18] The LORD has disciplined me severely,
but he has not given me over to death. (ESV)

Psalm 118:19–23
\[19] Open to me the gates of righteousness,
that I may enter through them
and give thanks to the LORD.
\[20] This is the gate of the LORD;
the righteous shall enter through it.
\[21] I thank you that you have answered me
and have become my salvation.
\[22] The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone.
\[23] This is the LORD’s doing;
it is marvelous in our eyes. (ESV)

Matthew 26:45
\[45] Then he came to the disciples and said to them, “Sleep and take your rest later on. See, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. (ESV)

John 10:7–10
\[7] So Jesus again said to them, “Truly, truly, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep. \[8] All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not listen to them. \[9] I am the door. If anyone enters by me, he will be saved and will go in and out and find pasture. \[10] The thief comes only to steal and kill and destroy. I came that they may have life and have it abundantly. (ESV)

Matthew 27:25
\[25] And all the people answered, “His blood be on us and on our children!” (ESV)

Matthew 27:43
\[43] He trusts in God; let God deliver him now, if he desires him. For he said, ‘I am the Son of God.’” (ESV)

Just about the time I would be feeling sorry for myself, we hear Jesus say,

Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. … Truly, I say to you, today you will be with me in paradise. (Luke 23:34, 43)

Christ's salvation is described in many ways.

His only-begotten Son. So there already, knowing that God the Father loves His Son and loves us, too, His love can be understood as the Father's love. And we may have a fine example in our earthly fathers — there, we have experienced God's own love.

Earthly mothers, the Bible tells us, also manifest God's own love. For there's a verse in Isaiah, chapter 49:
> **Can a woman forget her nursing child, that she should have no compassion on the son of her womb? Even these may forget, yet I*\[, the LORD,]***  **will not forget you.**  (Is. 49:15)

So whether we say *steadfast love* or *mercy*, it's the same thing — it's God's love which is wonderful in *many ways* and we might say wonderful beyond describing. But describe it we must as the Bible describes it to us. And believe it we do, by the grace of the Spirit. The steadfast love of God has been revealed to us in the Person and work of Jesus Christ (John 3:16).

Furthermore, we are reminded that King Solomon rode into Jerusalem on his father David's mule (1 Ki. 1:33).