---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: August 3, 2025
title: I WILL STRIVE TO WIN A TREASURE THAT WILL BRING ME LASTING PLEASURE.
occasion: 8th Sunday after Pentecost
readings:
  - Eccl. 1:2, 12-14; 2:18-26
  - Col. 3:1-11
  - Luke 12:13-21
sermon_text: Luke 12:13-21
bible_version: ESV
---

# I WILL STRIVE TO WIN A TREASURE THAT WILL BRING ME LASTING PLEASURE.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Grant us Your Spirit, Lord Jesus, that we follow You to heaven. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today's Holy Gospel brings up two brothers squabbling over an inheritance. A man approaches our Lord Jesus and says to Him, **"Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."**  Looking back to the Catechism, this is a Ninth Commandment issue:
> **You shall not covet your neighbor's house.**  *What does this mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not scheme to get our neighbor's inheritance or house, or get it in a way which only appears right, but help and be of service to him in keeping it.

Inheritances are a Ninth Commandment issue—my neighbor's house—my parents' house—which is to be inherited by others, but also possibly inherited by me. This Commandment does not tend to come up on a day-to-day basis, but when life events happen that affect an estate—events that affect my standing in an inheritance—when there's something going on with an inheritance—family harmony can be affected for better or for worse. For example, if, God forbid, I were left out of an inheritance because I was a drinker who would waste my inheritance on alcohol, this could affect me and my family for generations, for better or for worse. Inheritances are a big issue.

Inheritances can be viewed as a financial windfall, like winning the lottery. "If I get \$50,000 as an inheritance, I could pay a lot of bills—I could buy a new car." And so, if I'm banking on winning the lottery to make my life better, I might view an inheritance in a similar way.

The Ninth Commandment warns me not to scheme—in my case, since I have one sister and no brothers—not to scheme to take away from Silvi that to which she is entitled from my parents' estate. Sin against this Commandment can take the form of suggesting to my parents that I, somehow, have been better to them than my sister and then suggesting that we make and adjustment to the will to give *me more money*. That, God forbid, would be breaking the Ninth Commandment. I may get the money, but it's stolen. I may get the money, but God has read my heart and He will discipline me (Heb. 12:6).

But at the heart of the Ninth Commandment, and also at the heart of the Tenth, is the word *covet*. What does it mean to covet? *\[Quote Explanation of the Small Catechism]*
> Coveting is the sinful desire in our hearts to acquire for ourselves *anything* that belongs to our neighbor. It is also the desire to draw away from our neighbor for our own benefit anyone who is important to our neighbor (a spouse, friends, and so on).

We can say that to covet is to *think* of stealing. Coveting defiles our hearts before God. Not only is this a bad thing, but it has serious consequences. In Psalm 80, it is written, **"O LORD God of hosts, how long will you be angry with your people's prayers?"**  (Ps. 80:4). When, God forbid, our hearts are defiled and we pray, the Bible warns us that our prayers may anger God. What is our heavenly Father going to do—keep giving us everything we ask for to satisfy our appetites?

*\[Illustration]*  Take King Saul, for example, as a warning. Remember that there came a point where the LORD did *not* answer Saul's prayers.
> **Now Samuel had died, and all Israel had mourned for him and buried him in Ramah, his own city. And Saul had put the mediums and the necromancers out of the land. The Philistines assembled and came and encamped at Shunem. And Saul gathered all Israel, and they encamped at Gilboa. When Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly. And when Saul inquired of the LORD,** ***the LORD did not answer him*, either by dreams, or by Urim, or by prophets. Then Saul said to his servants, "Seek out for me a woman who is a medium, that I may go to her and inquire of her." And his servants said to him, "Behold, there is a medium at En-dor."**  (1 Sam. 28:3–7)

Saul had rebelled against God, the LORD did not answer his prayers, and things went from bad to worse for Saul—we are warned by Scripture *not* to follow Saul's example and turn to satanic arts.

*\[Transition]*  Scripture also gives us King David as a foil for King Saul. The first thing to note is that David committed sins that are not recorded of Saul, and I believe you know what I'm talking about. This brings us back to coveting, which the Commandments warn us not to do, but this time it's the Tenth Commandment. David started by breaking the Tenth Commandment:
> **You shall not covet your neighbors wife, … or his manservant or maidservant, his ox or donkey, or anything that belongs to your neighbor.**  *What does this mean?*  We should fear and love God so that we do not entice or force away our neighbor's wife, workers, or animals, or turn them against him, but urge them to stay and do their duty.

*\[Ask]*  Does anyone need me to review David's sin concerning Bathsheba? Bathsheba was Uriah's wife and David coveted her, … and before David was done sinning he had coveted her, committed adultery with her, and had Uriah killed in battle. David's heart was so defiled that God was no doubt angry with his prayers.

God's discipline was coming, but, belovèd in the Lord, He was nevertheless faithful to His promise to David to establish his throne forever (2 Sam. 7:12–13). How did the LORD keep His promise to David, the poor, miserable sinner? God kept His promise by sending Nathan the prophet to confront David with his sin. *\[Ask]*  Does anyone need me to review the way in which Nathan confronted David with his sin? Nathan told David about a rich man doing injustice to a poor man. All the poor man had was one ewe lamb that he loved like a daughter. The rich man took the poor man's lamb and fed it to the rich man's guest. Upon hearing this, David was enraged, thinking that this had happened in his kingdom. But Nathan had told it as a metaphor of what David had done to Uriah.

And in a verse that summarizes the whole Bible, 2 Samuel 12:13,
> **David said to Nathan, "I have sinned against the LORD." And Nathan said to David, "The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die."** (2 Sam. 12:13)

"David, the LORD has put away your sin *for the sake of Jesus*, the Messiah, your offspring, who will reign on your throne forever." And here, belovèd in the Lord, David … and you and I … find our greatest treasure as we sang in the hymn: "I WILL STRIVE TO WIN A TREASURE THAT WILL BRING ME LASTING PLEASURE."

For, belovèd in the Lord, we have no greater treasure than our Lord Jesus Christ ( *LSB* 743). He has done for us that which none of us could: *\[Crucifixion]*  He has won for us full forgiveness of all of our sins by bearing them all on the Cross. Our treasure comes to us as debt relief: that which we owe to God for breaking His Commandments has been paid in full by Christ our Redeemer. We have not won our forgiveness: He has won it for us. Without this forgiveness we still may have mammon here on earth, but *with* this blood-bought forgiveness … we … have … heaven—all of the treasures of heaven are ours in Christ Jesus.

So what is there to strive for since Christ has already won it? Belovèd in the Lord, what there is to strive for is simply to follow our Lord Jesus to heaven, as He teaches us:
> **Strive to enter through the narrow door. For many, I tell you, will seek to enter and will not be able.**  (Luke 13:24)

Whatever door our Lord opens for us in this life, take it. Take it—**set your minds on things that are above, not on things that are on earth** (Col. 3:2)—but it won't be easy. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Ephesians 5:3–5
\[3] But sexual immorality and all impurity or covetousness must not even be named among you, as is proper among saints. \[4] Let there be no filthiness nor foolish talk nor crude joking, which are out of place, but instead let there be thanksgiving. \[5] For you may be sure of this, that everyone who is sexually immoral or impure, or who is covetous (that is, an idolater), has no inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and God. (ESV)

Ephesians 5:11
\[11] Take no part in the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead expose them. (ESV)

Commemoration of Joanna, Mary, and Salome, Myrrhbearers

The Prodigal Son wasted his inheritance.