---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 8, 2024
title: THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST STILL COMES
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - OT/First
  - Epistle
  - Luke 3:1-20
sermon_text: Luke 3:1-20
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST STILL COMES
Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Holy Spirit, with such faith to know that our Lord Jesus comes with forgiveness for our sins, no matter how Satan may attack. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, my sister and mother are visiting the old country this week. And thanks be to God for Silvi, my sister, because none of this would happen without her. But fifty-five years ago, it was unimaginable to hop on a flight and fly to Estonia to visit relatives because Estonia was occupied by the Soviet Union and you could not travel there freely like we can today.

Nevertheless, fifty-five years ago, relatives over there in Estonia and other occupied countries could apply to travel to visit family in the free world. It was a tightly controlled process. And I can never forget the excitement that my great aunt, Alma, was coming to Canada to visit my grandparents, for Alma Tädi—that's what we always called her—Alma Tädi and my grandmother were sisters and the really, really missed each other. So my family traveled up from Chicago to Ontario to be there, of course, when my great aunt arrived.

This was perhaps my first experience of *intense anticipation*. I was a child. Anticipating my birthday was one thing, but this, I understood, was something else. I had relatives—people whom I could talk to who knew who I was—people who knew about me, but circumstances did not allow us to see each other. I was aware that getting to see my great aunt was far more precious than any toy I might get for my birthday. So I really wanted to see her.

But she didn't come. There had been complications in Moscow. So we sadly climbed back in the car and started down the snowy Highway 401 back to Chicago. … *And then she finally came.*  I'll never forget that. My father must have called from a phone booth to check. Alma Tädi was coming after all! We turned around and when we arrived, there she was! I had heard her name a thousand times and now I finally saw her. I'll never forget that day.

*\[Transition]*  But a far more important name to remember is *Righteous Branch*, and far greater was the anticipation that He come. *Righteous Branch* is the name for the promised Messiah foretold by the prophet Jeremiah.
> **Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will raise up for David a** ***righteous Branch*, and he shall reign as king and deal wisely, and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land. In his days Judah will be saved, and Israel will dwell securely. And this is the name by which he will be called: "** ***The LORD is our righteousness*."**  (Jer. 23:5–6)

The days are coming and now have finally arrived in our Holy Gospel for the Righteous Branch to be here. The prophet Malachi had foretold,
> **Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes. And he will turn the hearts of fathers to their children and the hearts of children to their fathers, lest I come and strike the land with a decree of utter destruction.**  (Mal. 4:5–6)

Elijah has come to prepare the way for the promised Messiah's imminent arrival. John the Baptist is Elijah (Matt. 11:14). And we hear John in today's Holy Gospel,
> **You brood of vipers! Who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?** ***Bear fruits in keeping with repentance.***  **And do not begin to say to yourselves, "We have Abraham as our father." For I tell you, God is able from these stones to raise up children for Abraham. Even now the axe is laid to the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that does not bear good fruit is cut down and thrown into the fire.**  (Luke 3:7b–9)

Take to heart the famous *brood of vipers* preaching of John the Baptist which prepares the way for Christ to come into our hearts. John's preaching of repentance underlines that God recognizes true repentance by our fruits: **"Bear fruits in keeping with repentance."**  Let us turn our backs on our idols and mourn that we ever had them! For God is watching. Don't go back there … and now hear this … *\[sing]*
> *"Comfort, comfort ye My people,*
> *Speak ye peace," thus saith our God;*
> *"Comfort those who sit in darkness,*
> *Mourning 'neath their sorrows' load.*
> *Speak ye to Jerusalem*
> *Of the peace that waits for them;*
> *Tell her that her sins I cover*
> *And her warfare now is over."*
> (LSB 347, st. 1; Is. 40:1–2)

I sang the hymn, and you can read it for yourself from the prophet Isaiah, chapter 40. When we repent—when, by the grace of the Spirit, we turn from our sins to face the righteous Branch, we need not be concerned about our own righteousness at all. *That's* a comfort. No need to justify ourselves in any way. "Tell her that her sins I cover." Belovèd in the Lord, whenever God tells us about the covering of our sins, we have come to the wonderful Bible Word: *atonement*. Atonement is the covering of sins in such a way that God does not even see our sins at all, no matter how they once grieved Him. When we turn to face the Righteous Branch, the promised Christ, not one of our sins hangs over our heads and we sure don't want to go back to them anymore, bearing the fruit of repentance. Atonement goes together with propitiation because God is not even angry with us anymore; all sin is forgotten. "Tell her that her sins I cover and her warfare now is over."

It is this way of peace through the forgiveness of sins in Christ's Name that John the Baptist has come to prepare—to announce the arrival of the kingdom of heaven to all who believe in Jesus, the promised Christ. The kingdom of Christ has come!

*\[Transition]*  But we cannot help but notice the final two verses of today's Holy Gospel. **"Herod the tetrarch, who had been reproved by \[John] for Herodias, his brother's wife, and for all the evil things that Herod had done, added this to them all, that he locked up John in prison."**  For Herod to bear fruits in keeping with repentance he had to put an end to his sin against marriage—he had to end his sinful relationship with Herodias, his brother's wife. You probably know this story well, but—behold!—John is thrown in prison for pointing out how Herod could bear fruit pleasing to God—so Herod could turn from his idol and hear the Word of forgiveness in the name of Christ. But Herod does not listen, and Herod does not repent, and he throws John in prison. (You know the rest of the story.)

Belovèd in the Lord, it may appear that the the devil has thrown a wrench in the coming of the kingdom of Christ. But he has not—he can only bring it on. THE KINGDOM OF CHRIST STILL COMES."


**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
God's clear Word about tithing comes after the end of the Old Testament lesson.

Malachi 3:7–10
\[7] From the days of your fathers you have turned aside from my statutes and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you, says the LORD of hosts. But you say, ‘How shall we return?’ \[8] Will man rob God? Yet you are robbing me. But you say, ‘How have we robbed you?’ In your tithes and contributions. \[9] You are cursed with a curse, for you are robbing me, the whole nation of you. \[10] Bring the full tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house. And thereby put me to the test, says the LORD of hosts, if I will not open the windows of heaven for you and pour down for you a blessing until there is no more need. (ESV)

Matthew 11:13–14
\[13] For all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John, \[14] and if you are willing to accept it, he is Elijah who is to come. (ESV)