---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 4, 2025
title: GIVE YOUR RIGHTEOUSNESS TO THE ROYAL SON
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Advent
readings:
  - Is. 11:1-10
  - Ps. 72:1-7, 18
  - Rom. 15:4-13
  - Matt. 3:1-12
sermon_text: Ps. 72:1-7, 18
bible_version: ESV
---

# GIVE YOUR RIGHTEOUSNESS TO THE ROYAL SON

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Give us, heavenly Father, the righteousness of Your royal Son, our Lord and King Jesus Christ. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, the four Sundays of Advent traditionally have the themes Hope, Peace, Joy, and Love, in that order. But looking at the lectionary, last Sunday's texts pointed toward Peace and this Sunday's texts point toward Hope, so Hope is the theme for today — Hope because of our King Jesus Christ. Next week it's Joy, *\[Advent wreath]*  and the pink candle on the Advent wreath will be lit.

The Old Testament prophecies establish the hope that the Messiah will come to save His people. There are many, many such prophecies in the Old Testament, the first of which is the promise that the Seed of Eve will come to bruise Satan's head. God makes this promise in the Garden of Eden after Adam and Eve have fallen into sin. The Lord addresses Satan and says, **"I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your seed and her Seed; He shall bruise your head, and you shall bruise His heel"**  (Gen. 3:15). The promised Savior is called the Seed of the Woman, who will bruise Satan's head, but whose heel will by bruised by Satan. *\[Crucifixion]*  This will be fulfilled at the Cross, where the Seed of Mary will defeat Satan for us. This is the first prophecy of the coming Messiah, the first proclamation of the Gospel, and if you were not already familiar with it, *hopefully* you are now.

There are many more prophecies of the Messiah told by the prophets Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Micah, and others. But I draw your attention this morning to one particular prophecy, which in a way is similar to the prophecy of Caiaphas. Do you remember the prophecy of Caiaphas? Caiaphas was the high priest in charge of the Sandhedrin who condemned our Lord Jesus to die. Before condemning our Lord to die, Caiaphas said this as he conferred with the Jewish leaders who opposed Christ. He said,
> **"You know nothing at all. Nor do you understand that** ***it is better for you that one man should die for the people, not that the whole nation should perish*."** ***\[Caiaphas] did not say this of his own accord*, but being high priest that year he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation, and not for the nation only, but also to gather into one the children of God who are scattered abroad.**  (John 11:49b–52)

Caiaphas, like Balaam (Num. 23:5), even though he opposed Christ, Caiaphas had to nevertheless speak what God put in his mouth, prophesying that Christ would die for the Jew first and also for the Greek (Rom. 1:16).

With Caiaphas in mind, I want to bring up a similar Old Testament prophecy *against* Christ, but really *for* Christ, and what I have in mind is not the prophecy of Balaam. It is the prophecy of *the Israelites who demanded a king* during the times of the prophet Samuel.
> **And the LORD said to Samuel, "Obey the voice of the people in all that they say to you, for they have not rejected you, but they have rejected Me from being king over them. According to all the deeds that they have done, from the day I brought them up out of Egypt even to this day, forsaking Me and serving other gods, so they are also doing to you. Now then,** ***obey their voice*; only you shall solemnly warn them and show them the ways of the king who shall reign over them."**  (1 Sam. 8:7–9)

Even though the Israelites are rejecting the One True God of Israel by demanding a king, the LORD says, "Okay. Let them have what they want — let them have their king." It is in this way that I propose to you that the Israelites, with evil hearts, had to nevertheless speak what God put in their mouth, that is, to demand a king, prophesying that Christ would one day come to be their King.

And now let us turn to today's Psalm, *\[St. Mark]*  which I neglected to print in the bulletin, but I will read it to you now. This psalm was written by Solomon.
> **Give the king your justice, O God, and your righteousness to the royal son! May he judge your people with righteousness, and your poor with justice! Let the mountains bear prosperity for the people, and the hills, in righteousness! May he defend the cause of the poor of the people, give deliverance to the children of the needy, and crush the oppressor! May they fear you while the sun endures, and as long as the moon, throughout all generations! May he be like rain that falls on the mown grass, like showers that water the earth! In his days may the righteous flourish, and peace abound, till the moon be no more!**

This is a prayer for the King of Israel, for the King of the Jews. Now Solomon was the greatest king in the land back in his day, but who is the Old Testament king most mentioned in the Bible — mentioned not only in the Old Testament but the New? None other than — and I bet you know this one — none other than *King David*. King David comes up numerous times in the Psalms. Hear the first verses of Psalm 89:
> **I will sing of the steadfast love of the LORD forever; with my mouth I will make known your faithfulness to all generations. For I said, "Steadfast love will be built up forever; in the heavens you will establish your faithfulness." You have said, "I have made a covenant with my chosen one; I have sworn** ***to David my servant*: 'I will establish your offspring forever, and build your throne for all generations.' "**  (Ps. 89:1–4)

God's promise to establish David's throne forever (2 Sam. 7:16) is set in stone — you might even say that it's set in stone before the foundation of the world (Eph. 1:4–5) because it is fulfilled by our Lord Jesus Christ being born of the house of David, born King of the Jews. We hear this every year at Christmastime:
> **Joseph also went up from Galilee, from the town of Nazareth, to Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and lineage of David, to be registered with Mary, his betrothed, who was with child.**  (Luke 2:4–5)

Belovèd in the Lord, God's promise to David to establish his throne forever is fulfilled by the birth of Christ to the family of Joseph, who is of the house and lineage of David. **"There shall come forth a shoot from the stump of Jesse, and a branch from his roots shall bear fruit"**  (Is. 11:1). Keep in mind also that David is the son of Jesse, and any prophecies mentioning Jesse also point to the promise made to David.

These Old Testament prophecies establish *the hope* that the Messiah will come as a righteous King to rule righteously over His people. GIVE YOUR RIGHTEOUSNESS TO THE ROYAL SON. There is no end to the yearning for a righteous ruler — a righteous king to rule over us and do good to the poor and maintain peace in the land. His rule of righteousness will be that one Man should die for the people; not that the people should perish. This is God's righteousness — this is God's good and gracious will for us in Christ Jesus our righteous King. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
John 18:36–37
\[36] Jesus answered, “My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world, my servants would have been fighting, that I might not be delivered over to the Jews. But my kingdom is not from the world.” \[37] Then Pilate said to him, “So you are a king?” Jesus answered, “You say that I am a king. For this purpose I was born and for this purpose I have come into the world—to bear witness to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice.” (ESV)