---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 9, 2025
title: TEMPTED AS WE ARE, AND VICTORIOUS
occasion: 1st Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Deut. 26:1-11
  - Rom. 10:8b-13
  - Luke 4:1-13
sermon_text: Luke 4:1-13
bible_version: ESV
---

# TEMPTED AS WE ARE, AND VICTORIOUS

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Gracious Father, you filled us with Your Spirit with our Baptism in the name of Your Son, Jesus. Strengthen us, we pray, against the devil. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have in the bulletin an announcement entitled *The Forty Days of Lent*. Please take a moment to look at it. *The Forty Days of Lent*—do you see it? It's an opportunity to do a little calendar math to see that there really are forty days in Lent. The season of Lent, by the way, is not commanded in the Bible that we observe it like we are commanded to have Holy Communion, where our Lord Jesus commands, *\[altar]*  **“Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of Me”** (1 Cor. 11:25b). There is no such command to observe Lent. But Lent, when it is observed, is salutary for our repentance—it is good for confessing our sin to God and turning away from it so that we are prepared to hear with our ears the declaration of forgiveness *\[Crucifixion]*  from Christ’s Cross and *\[altar]*  to receive with out lips Christ’s body and blood for our forgiveness. Christ's blood declares us forgiven of those very sins of which we have repented, even of the ones we are not aware of, as we pray in the Lord's Prayer. By Christ's hard-won forgiveness we will always have a clean slate to work with yet again. And so, observing Lent can be very good. *\[Humor]*  Add Friday fish fries and it got even better.

Looking again at the bulletin announcement about Lent we see this statement: *Sundays are little Easters in the middle of Lent*. *\[Resurrection]*  Easter Sunday, the day that immediately follows Lent, is a huge victory—it’s Christ’s Resurrection!—and it *looks* like victory: Christ comes out from the grave alive. Alleluia!

But dying on the Cross does not *look* like a victory—it looks horrible. Yet the Bible proclaims the Cross a victory because Christ’s blood, shed for us, does cover our sins; that's a victory. His blood, shed for us, is our propitiation; that's a victory. *And*, fully forgiven in Christ’s name, Satan has no power over us, *and* we know Christ’s Resurrection is right around the corner, *and* our own resurrection is right around the corner, too, after a little rest in the grave; that's a string of victories. Though Christ’s Cross *is* our big win, His suffering and death do not *look like it*—He is mocked, He is scourged (Mark  15:15), He is spat upon (Mark 15:19), He is nailed to a Cross, and He dies. His victory is *hidden behind suffering*, so to speak.

And so today, belovèd in the Lord, we take note that victories in Christ are often hidden behind suffering—they don’t *look* victorious: they look like something bad has happened. But these sufferings and trials are, in the name of Jesus, nevertheless great victories. Let us keep an eye out for these hidden victories for ourselves when we suffer as we hear the voice of our Good Shepherd Jesus and follow Him. Keeping these hidden victories in mind, I proclaim to you today’s Holy Gospel, the temptation of Christ, as a little Easter at the beginning of Lent.

*\[Euphemism]*  Because not eating for forty days does not appear victorious. Not eating for forty days is worse in the wilderness. Not eating for forty days even worse when you have the devil around your neck, and we get the idea that Christ is suffering a lot. Christ was in agony on the Cross, this we know, but He is not far behind in the wilderness, hungry and tempted by devil.

We are not told Satan’s physical appearance as he tempts Christ in the wilderness. (In the Garden of Eden he appears as a snake.) Nevertheless we learn exactly how to recognize him: he speaks and he *cloaks his lies*. His words are pure lie, but how the devil does dress them up.

**“*If*** **you are the Son of God,”** … These are the first words we hear from Satan at Christ's temptation. Notice that **“*If*** **you are the Son of God”** is of the same genre as **"Did God really say?"**  (Gen. 3:1). Why question that Christ is the Son of God if He is? Why question that Christ is the Son of God when there is another who cries out, **“You** ***are*** **the Son of God!”** (Luke 4:41b)? *\[Ask]*  The devil questions *if* Jesus is the Son of God, but who is it that cries out, **“You** ***are*** **the Son of God!”**? Do you remember? *Demons* cry out later in Luke, chapter 4, **“You** ***are*** **the Son of God!”** (Luke 4:41b). The demons know, and so does Satan, that Christ is the Son of God. But learn well from our Holy Gospel that wherever stands God’s authority is where Satan sows doubt: “If” - **“*If*** **you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread.”**

Once the devil has sown doubt he gives a command as though *he is the one in authority*: **“Command this stone to become bread.”** So Satan thinks He's the boss? Our Lord Jesus does not fall for it, of course, *not even a little bit*. First of all, Christ knows He’s the Son of God—He’s still in authority no matter how weak and miserable He is. Second of all, our Lord counterattacks with a weapon that we, too, have: the Word of God, the sword of the Spirit (Eph. 6:17). Christ, our Lord, wields the sword of the Spirit and quotes directly from the Law of Moses: **“**It is written,  **'Man \[shall] not live by bread alone, but man lives by every Word that comes from the mouth of the LORD'** ” (Deut. 8:3b). We hear it in the Holy Gospel, but, belovèd in the Lord, don’t ever forget it: **man shall not live by bread alone**. We live by every Word that comes from the mouth of the Lord. God Word, by far, is our greatest treasure.

The devil repeats this pattern with every temptation. And so, we learn to recognize the devil by his manner of speech. The devil cloaks a lie every time and Christ answers, “**It is written** in the Bible.” Now to cloak a lie is also to hide something. And since we are talking about hidden things and we are learning patterns from the Bible, note that Satan operates in a pattern that is the *opposite* of Christ: Satan hides his lies in fake strength; Christ hides his truth in real weakness. And from this pattern, belovèd in the Lord, and from Christ being able to withstand every temptation of the devil, we see that in Christ, our real weakness is the means by which God loves to demonstrate His real strength. And lest we forget, belovèd in the Lord, hear what we are to know for when we, too, are tempted. It is written in 1 Corinthians, chapter 13, **"No temptation has overtaken you that is not common to man. God is faithful, and he will not let you be tempted beyond your ability, but with the temptation he will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it"**  (1 Cor. 10:13).

Belovèd in the Lord, let not let the devil deceive us to believe that somehow Christ endured temptation in a way that we cannot. Our Lord *was* weak. Though Christ is 100% God, it is important for us to know that He is at the same time *100% man*. He hungered and was tempted *as one of us*. His victory over Satan when He was tempted is absolutely for us to repeat in our lives so that we do not fall for the devil's lies *not even a little bit*. And did you ever notice that this is underlined by the fact that the temptation of Christ takes place right after His Baptism, where He is baptized *as one of us sinners*. Christ is tempted as we are, in total weakness, *and He, by the grace of the Spirit, is victorious, and so are we*.

*\[Conclusion]*  Christ's complete victory over the devil is proclaimed to us today already at His temptation. Christ's complete victory will be demonstrated over and over as He casts out demons by the authority of His Word. Christ's complete victory will be demonstrated at the Cross and it will be demonstrated again when He descends into hell and comes out *\[Resurrection]*  alive and victorious. And finally, beloved in the Lord, Christ's complete victory over the devil will be demonstrated this day where He lives in the hearts of His baptized.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Luke 4:36
\[36] And they were all amazed and said to one another, “What is this word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!”

Luke 4:41
\[41] And demons also came out of many, crying, “You are the Son of God!” But he rebuked them and would not allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ.