---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: February 22, 2026
title: BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHOSE TRANSGRESSION IS FORGIVEN.
occasion: 1st Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Gen. 3:1-21
  - Ps. 32
  - Rom. 5:12-19
  - Matt. 4:1-11
sermon_text: Ps. 32
bible_version: ESV
---

# BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHOSE TRANSGRESSION IS FORGIVEN.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We thank You, Lord Jesus, for the forgiveness we so badly needed. We are truly blessèd in Your name. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today is the first Sunday in Lent — we finally made it to Lent — yay! … other than, as you may well know, Lent is the season when we make it a point to lament our sin. And while we're preaching on the Psalms this year, take note that there is a well-known list of penitential psalms — psalms to make our own during Lent. And those are Psalms 6, 32, 38, 51, 102, 130, and 143. Today's psalm, Psalm 32, is on that list.

Let us then turn to our psalm and learn how to properly lament our sin in the third and fourth verses.
> **When I kept silent, my bones wasted away through my groaning all day long. For day and night Your hand was heavy upon me; my strength was dried up as by the heat of summer.**

That sets the tone for Lent — this is how it feels to lament our sin.

But you may notice that I'm maybe a little too light-hearted for all of this, and that might not be appropriate for Lent. Really? Let's do the math. *\[Ask]*  How many days are there in Lent? … Many have heard of the forty days of Lent. So, last Wednesday was Ash Wednesday, and that's Day 1. *\[Count on you fingers]*  Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday, Sunday — that makes Day 5, and we want to work all the way up to April 4, which is Holy Saturday, which is the last day of Lent. Today is Day 5 for February 22.
* Add 7 makes 12 for March 1.
* Add 7 makes 19 for March 8.
* Add 7 makes 26 for March 15.
* Add 7 makes 33 for March 22.
* Add 7 makes 40 for March 29 already!

But March 29 is Palm Sunday and Lent is not over yet. We still have six days to go to Holy Saturday.
* Add 6 makes 46 for Saturday, April 4.

Where did we go wrong? We have 46 days in Lent. *\[Ask]*  Should we do the math again and double check? What happened to the *forty* days of Lent? Here's the catch: today, February 22 is *\[start showing fingers]*  the first Sunday in Lent — March 1, March 8, March 15, March 22, March 29 (Palm Sunday) makes how many Sundays in Lent? Six! There are always six Sundays in Lent. Subtract 6 from 46 and we have it: 40 days. There *are* forty days in Lent, but the Sundays do not count! Pastor Marcis taught me that the Sundays in Lent are little Easters — little celebrations of Christ's Resurrection. Today is a little Easter and it's okay to be light-hearted on a Sunday in Lent because Christ is risen! He is risen indeed! Alleluia!

We have before us Psalm 32, but I don't want you to remember this psalm by its number: I want you to remember it by its title: **"BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHOSE TRANSGRESSION IS FORGIVEN."**  *\[Ask]*  And guess who wrote Psalm 32: David. Not only is **"BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHOSE TRANSGRESSION IS FORGIVEN"**  a penitential psalm, it is written by King David himself and connects directly to his career as a forgiven sinner.

Belovèd in the Lord, I will focus on the fifth verse: **"I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and You forgave the iniquity of my sin."**  *\[Ask]*  Belovèd in the Lord, have you ever heard this before? Yes, you most certainly have, for this verse has been elevated to the liturgy so that we confess it hundreds of times for the rest of our lives. Note that *confess* means two things. First, we *confess* the whole verse to be true: **"I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and You forgave the iniquity of my sin."**  Second, **"I said, I will** ***confess*** **my transgressions unto the Lord."**  The second meaning of *confess* simply means, "I've sinned, God. I'm sorry."

We will take the fifth verse of Psalm 32 which we confess as a whole, and now please turn now to 2 Samuel, chapter 12, verse 13, where it is written, **"David said to Nathan, 'I have sinned against the LORD.' And Nathan said to David, 'The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die.' "**  This thirteenth verse of 2 Samuel, chapter 12 is essentially the same as the fifth verse of Psalm 32 other than now we can tie specific events and specific people to 2 Samuel 12:13. First, **"I have sinned against the LORD"**  — David is confessing his infamous sins which he committed in 2 Samuel, chapter 11. And second, **"The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die"**  — Nathan personally declares this to David to absolve him of those very sins.

The bulletin cover art is intended to depict this. *\[Direct]*  Please turn your attention to the bulletin cover. In the upper left-hand corner is Nathan pointing out David's sin and David saying, **"I have sinned against the LORD."**  David is repentant, so there is no time to waste. So, right away, all in the same verse, Nathan absolves David in Christ's name, **"The LORD also has put away your sin; you shall not die."**  This is the Cross in the lower right-hand corner, where Christ puts away David's sin. David believed in Christ's forgiveness, and the Spirit inspired him to write our psalm " **BLESSÈD IS THE ONE WHOSE TRANSGRESSION IS FORGIVEN** in Jesus' name."

2 Samuel 12:13 connects to specific people and to David's specific sins, which are for the whole world to see in the previous chapter. I will not go over the details of his sins, but I will go over the Commandments that he broke.
> The Tenth Commandment. **"You shall not covert your neighbor's wife, …"**  What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not entice or force away our neighbor's wife, … but urge her to stay and do her duty.


> The Sixth Commandment. **"You shall not commit adultery."**  What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we lead a sexually pure and decent life in what we say and do, and husband and wife love and honor each other.


> The Fifth Commandment. **"You shall not murder."**  What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not hurt or harm our neighbor in his body, but help and support him in every physical need.


David broke all of these. *\[Ask]*  When David was tempted to break the Tenth, was he sinning? No, not yet. We are tempted every day, and being tempted is not a sin. But giving in to temptation is. Still, we have this promise from God's Word in 1 Corintians, chapter 10:
> **No temptation has overtaken you that is not common to man. God is faithful, and He will not let you be tempted beyond your ability, but with the temptation He will also provide the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it.**  (1 Cor. 10:13)

*\[Font]*  We are given the Holy Spirit with our Baptism to help us when tempted. Pray for the Holy Spirit (Luke 11:13) and He'll be there, and Je will gladly provide the way of escape in Jesus' name!

Sadly, however, David grieved the Holy Spirit (Eph. 4:30) and gave in to temptation, and did his sin ever multiply! Nathan mercifully confronted him and David did repent, which is all any of us can do — there is nothing we can do to make it better — Jesus, who is both God and Man, is the only One able to make it better. And beloved in the Lord, we have the Cross where Jesus bore our sins and did make everything better — not so much for Him, but very much better for us. By faith in His name for the forgiveness of our sins we stand not at all under God's wrath but under His fatherly favor, which is why you and I and David are all *blessèd*.

> ***BLESSÈD*** **IS THE ONE WHOSE TRANSGRESSION IS FORGIVEN, whose sin is covered.** ***Blessèd*** **is the man against whom the LORD counts no iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no deceit. … I acknowledged my sin to You, and I did not cover my iniquity; I said, "I will confess my transgressions to the LORD," and You forgave the iniquity of my sin. Therefore let everyone who is godly offer prayer to You at a time when you may be found; surely in the rush of great waters, they shall not reach him. You are a hiding place for me; You preserve me from trouble; You surround me with shouts of deliverance.**


**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.
## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes