---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 17, 2025
title: BLESSÈD MARY
occasion: 3rd Sunday in Advent midweek
readings:
  - Luke 1:46-55
sermon_text: Luke 1:46-55
bible_version: ESV
---

# BLESSÈD MARY
Belovèd in the Lord, this Advent we have seen that as we learn about Mary we learn about her Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. The end of her conversation with the angel Gabriel wrapped up like this.
> **Mary said to the angel, "How will this be, since I am a virgin?"**
> **And the angel answered her, "The Holy Spirit will come upon you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you; therefore the Child to be born will be called holy—the Son of God. And behold, your relative Elizabeth in her old age has also conceived a son, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren. For nothing will be impossible with God." And Mary said, "Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to Your Word." And the angel departed from her.**  (Luke 1:34–38)

Mary's response to Gabriel, **"Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to your word"**  shines in the history of man. Here she confesses her faith that what God told her must be true and " **let it be so to me** — let whatever You say, Lord, happen to me." Mary is the anti-Eve — where Eve was enticed to disbelieve God's Word Mary is not. And by Mary's obedience to God's Word something wonderful happens — beyond wonderful, for it is the reason why we celebrate Christmas to this day. We are not told the exact timing of the conception of Christ in the womb of Mary, but it could be that as soon as she said **"let it be so to me"**  it was done: the Holy Spirit overshadowed her and the Son of God was now incarnate. Advent hymns wonder at this.
> *Not by human flesh and blood,*
> *By the Spirit of our God,*
> *Was the Word of God made flesh —*
> *Woman's offspring, pure and fresh*

Next we see Mary visiting her cousin Elizabeth, who has conceived in her old age, and who carries John the Baptist in her womb.
> **And when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the baby leaped in her womb. And Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit, and she exclaimed with a loud cry, "Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb! And why is this granted to me that the mother of my Lord should come to me? For behold, when the sound of your greeting came to my ears, the baby in my womb leaped for joy. And blessèd is she who believed that there would be a fulfillment of what was spoken to her from the Lord."**  (Luke 1:41–45)

BLESSÈD MARY. Next we have the Magnificat — what Mary then speaks in return to Elizabeth, praising God. These next verses in Luke, chapter 2, the Magnificat, are some of the best-known and most-sung verses of the Bible. The Magnificat is sung at every Vespers service like this: *\[Sing a few verses of the Magnificat: "My soul magnifies the Lord … all generations will call me blessèd"]*

First, Mary exclaims how happy she is: **"My soul magnifies the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior."**  Even though she's not a princess, even though she's not the daughter of the rich and famous, God has chosen Mary to be the one to bear the Son of God to the world.
> **For He has looked on the humble estate of His servant. For behold, from now on all generations will call me blessèd.**

And look for that special pronunciation *blessèd* instead of *blessed* to indicate God's particular favor — BLESSÈD MARY.

Furthermore, Mary confesses that **"He who is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is His name."**  Here we are at the heart of the matter: God is holy; God is mighty. Only the One who is holy has the right to judge. Only the One who is mighty has the power to execute judgment. Yes, God is holy … and *merciful* toward those who fear Him — those who recognize that He is holy and we are not. Remember that the angel Gabriel has declared, **"the Child to be born will be called holy—the Son of God."**  This is the Child through whom the Father shows us mercy to all of us who confess our sin before God. What's wonderful is that God is merciful *to all* for the sake of the Child in Mary's womb — BLESSÈD MARY — blessèd are we through the Son of Mary.

*\[Transition]*  We hear in Proverbs, **"Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall"**  (Prov. 16:18). But Mary confesses her humble estate and she is, and ever will be, lifted up not for her merits — did you hear her boasting of her merits? — as though she deserved God's favor, but Mary is lifted up for her faith, for confessing with her lips, **"Behold, I am the servant of the Lord; let it be to me according to Your Word"**  and conceiving for us our Savior — for believing that **nothing will be impossible with God** and conceiving the incarnate God in her womb.

Christ's conception is wonderful to think about, wonderful to sing about, and we know it happened because Mary believes what God told her. O BLESSÈD MARY, how can we praise you enough for believing God's Word, for giving your flesh to be the flesh in which our God was born to save us. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Taken from *Concordia Pulpit Resources*, Vol. 36, Part I. This sermon series, *All About Mary*, was written by Rev. Frederic W. Baue.