---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 10, 2025
title: SHE IS BETROTHED TO JOSEPH
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Advent midweek
readings:
  - Luke 1:27
sermon_text: Luke 1:27
bible_version: ESV
---

# SHE IS BETROTHED TO JOSEPH

Belovèd in the Lord, this year's sermon series is *All About Mary*. But, truth be told, it's really about Jesus. It is all about Jesus through what we are told about Mary, the God-bearer, the *theotokos*, Christ's human mother.

But before she becomes the God-bearer, MARY IS BETROTHED TO JOSEPH. Marriage is the picture of Christ and His Church from the beginning of the Bible to the end, and marriage is tied in also to the birth of our Lord.

Last week we heard that it is a big deal that the angel Gabriel would seek out Mary — she is chosen not by merit, but by grace, to bear God to the world as a sinless man to become the sin offering for us. This week we will hear that it is also a big deal that SHE IS BETROTHED TO JOSEPH.

It is noteworthy that the genealogy of Jesus Christ, as recorded in Matthew, chapter 1, begins with Abraham and finishes with Joseph, passing through David, king of Israel, in the middle (Matt. 1:2–16). Joseph is documented to be in the line of David. And it is to David that the Lord promised,
> **When your days are fulfilled and you lie down with your fathers, I will raise up your offspring after you, who shall come from your body, and I will establish his kingdom. He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom** ***forever*. … And your house and your kingdom shall be made sure** ***forever*** **before me. Your throne shall be established** ***forever*.**  (2 Sam. 7:12–13, 16)

Did you hear the Lord say *forever*? This promise from the Lord may indeed be the reason why the Jews kept genealogies: God has been specific in His promise, so track the promise — watch, the Messiah will be born of the line of David — the everlasting throne of David will be established, according to God's promise, when the Messiah is born. And the line of David does lead to Joseph. So Mary, being betrothed to Joseph, qualifies to be the mother of the Messiah.

And as we are spending the year with the Psalms, it is time to bring up the psalm whose first verse is this: **"The LORD says to my Lord: 'Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies your footstool.' "**  (Ps. 110:1) *\[Ask]*  Do you know which psalm this is? Psalm 110 is a psalm of David and a psalm about the Messiah, whose enemies will be His footstool. *\[Ask]*  Do you remember how our Lord comments on this Psalm? Our Lord Jesus says,
> **How can the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David? David himself, in the Holy Spirit, declared, " 'The Lord said to my Lord, sit at my right hand, until I put your enemies under your feet.' " David himself calls Him Lord. So how is He his son?**  (Mark 12:35b–37a)

How can David call his own Son *Lord*? By way of a riddle, our Lord teaches that if David calls the Son of David *Lord*, then the Son of David must be none other than the Lord, *the One True God of Israel in the flesh*. Bearing in mind what King David prophesied by the Holy Spirit, Mary, being betrothed to Joseph, is in line to *give birth to the incarnate God*. She is marked to be the God-bearer; in Greek, *theotokos*.

But now to Mary and Joseph being betrothed at all. Being betrothed is a godly relationship between a man and his betrothed — and you gotta love those French words — betrothal is a godly relationship between a fiancé and his fiancée, spelled differently but pronounced the same, who are to be married according to God's holy ordinance. Note that Mary and Joseph will be married, becoming one flesh not before they are married but after, according to God's holy ordinance, without even a hint of sexual immorality — nothing here for a risqué reality show. Marriage is honored by both Mary and Joseph throughout the conception and birth of the Messiah. And when the Savior is born we will behold Him: the faithful Bridegroom of His Church, born to give Himself up for her, bearing her sins that He might make her holy, *\[fon]*  cleansing her by the washing of water with the word (Eph. 5:25b–26).

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Taken from *Concordia Pulpit Resources*, Vol. 36, Part I. This sermon series, *All About Mary*, was written by Rev. Frederic W. Baue.

Luke 1:27–28
\[27] to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the virgin’s name was Mary. \[28] And he came to her and said, “Greetings, O favored one, the Lord is with you!” (ESV)

crèche: a representation of the Nativity scene

Mark 12:35–37
\[35] And as Jesus taught in the temple, he said, “How can the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David? \[36] David himself, in the Holy Spirit, declared,
“‘The Lord said to my Lord,
“Sit at my right hand,
until I put your enemies under your feet.”’


\[37] David himself calls him Lord. So how is he his son?” And the great throng heard him gladly. (ESV)

This passage quotes Ps. 110:1.