---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: December 3, 2025
title: HOW DOES THE BIBLE INTRODUCE MARY?
occasion: 1st Sunday in Advent midweek
readings:
  - Luke 1:26
sermon_text: Luke 1:26
bible_version: ESV
---

# HOW DOES THE BIBLE INTRODUCE MARY?

Belovèd in the Lord, this year's sermon series is *All About Mary*. But, truth be told, it's really about Jesus. It is all about Jesus through what we are told about Mary, the God-bearer, the *theotokos*, Christ's human mother.

I introduced Mary as *theotokos*, which means *God-bearer*, which is a term out of church history. But HOW DOES THE BIBLE INTRODUCE MARY? We hear about her the most in Luke, chapters 1 and 2. Today's text is a single verse, Luke 1:26. What we hear in this verse is that the first thing about Mary is that the angel Gabriel has been sent from God to speak to her: **"In the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee named Nazareth."**  The Greek word *angel* means *messenger*. Gabriel is a messenger sent by God. To where is Gabriel sent? To Nazareth.

The Bible teaches us that angels are heavenly creatures. Just as there are creatures on earth there are creatures in heaven, which we don't normally see. But if we do see them, something special is going on. Gabriel has been sent from heaven to earth to speak with a virgin betrothed to be married; her name is Mary. This marks her as a special person. But that may be an understatement, for, after all, we will be considering her for a whole sermon series. But Mary is special, indeed.

The angel Gabriel is also mentioned in Daniel, chapters 8 and 9, telling Daniel that it was time for the Israelites, who are in bondage in Babylon, to return home to Jerusalem. Gabriel is on a similar mission here, for the time has come for the Messiah to appear to set free all who are in bondage to sin to return home to God Himself. It had to be this way — God chose that it had to be this way — to love man, created in His image — to save man, corrupted by sin — God chose to save man *as a man* — He had to become one of us to save us as we are — out of love, He chose to come with incorruptible human flesh to save our human flesh, corrupted by the sin of Adam. How deeply is Mary thinking of this as Gabriel appears to her? We are not told, but she is a young Jewish woman who has surely been instructed in the Scriptures. The bulletin art suggests that shew has been studying the Scriptures. God has predestined her human flesh to be the vessel by whom the Word is to become flesh (John 1:14) — by whom the Son of God is to become incarnate. Alleluia!

Nazareth — take note that Nazareth is far north from Jerusalem — Jerusalem being where all the important people are. Nazareth is in the region of Galilee, the region by the Sea of Galilee, sometimes called *Galilee of the Gentiles*, which is not a flattering term. As for Jews who live in Galilee of the Gentiles, they speak with their own accent, and were they among us now, someone would probably call them *hillbillies*. Be that as it may, God has sent Gabriel especially to Nazareth.

Belovèd in the Lord, is this not exactly how God choses to work *every time* — make something out of nothing? Paul writes in Romans, chapter 4 about old Abraham, a hundred years old with his 90-year-old barren wife, Sarah.
> **That is why it depends on faith, in order that the promise may rest on grace and be guaranteed to all his offspring—not only to the adherent of the law but also to the one who shares the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all, as it is written, "I have made you the father of many nations" — in the presence of the God in whom he believed,**  ***who gives life to the dead and calls into existence the things that do not exist*.**  (Rom. 4:16–17)

God works things this way so that all depends on faith alone, which guarantees the correct outcome of anything that God promises. And we will hear the angel Gabriel himself tell Mary, **"Nothing will be impossible with God"**  (Luke 1:37). We get the hint, even before we hear Mary say anything or see her do anything — we get the hint that she will demonstrate for our blessing the faith of Abraham.

Gabriel is sent to Mary, a virgin betrothed to Joseph. How old is she? We are not told, but she is of age to be married. And that she is a virgin has been foretold by Isaiah, **"Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call His name Immanuel"**  (Is. 7:14).

Is there any quality of Mary that sets her apart from other young Jewish women? Again, we are not told anything other than that she is favored by God: **"Greetings, O favored one, the Lord is with you!"**  (Luke 1:28) There are many things we are not told, but we are told all we need to know. One thing we are told is that **all have sinned and fall short of the glory of God** (Rom. 3:23), and Mary is no exception. She is chosen not by merit, but by grace, to bear God to the world as a sinless man to become the sin offering for us **that in Him** ***we***, of all people, **might become the righteousness of God** (2 Cor. 5:21). Alleluia!

Take note that the Roman Church has a teaching called *the immaculate conception*. "Sure," you might say, "the immaculate conception of Christ, who is born without sin." No, the Roman teaching of the immaculate conception is about Mary's *mother*, Anne, and that *Mary* was born without sin. Beware! This is found nowhere in the Bible and is a made-up teaching of man.

Also take note that many believe that Mary somehow serves as mediator between man and God — Mary is gentle and kind and more approachable than her stern Son, Jesus. Again, what does the Bible say? **"There is one God, and there is one mediator between God and men,**  ***the man Christ Jesus*, who gave himself as a ransom for all"**  (1 Tim. 2:5–6a). We, by the grace of the Spirit, stick with Scripture alone.

Mary is human like the rest of us, but she has found favor by God's grace. And she, like us, has found favor in God's eyes all because of the Son who is to be conceived in her by faith. He will born of Mary to bear her sins and our sins and carry them far away, as far as the east is from the west (Ps. 103:12). **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Taken from *Concordia Pulpit Resources*, Vol. 36, Part I. This sermon series, *All About Mary*, was written by Rev. Frederic W. Baue.