---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 24, 2024
title: THE SON OF MAN IS NEAR, AT THE VERY GATES.
occasion: Last Sunday of the Church Year
readings:
  - Dan. 7:9-10, 13-14
  - Jude 20-25
  - Mark 13:24-37
sermon_text: Mark 13:24-37
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE SON OF MAN IS NEAR, AT THE VERY GATES.

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Bless us, Lord Jesus, with Your Spirit, that we be ready at the hour of Your return. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, He returns tonight. What are you going to do? **"THE SON OF MAN IS NEAR, AT THE VERY GATES."**  May His imminent arrival always direct our attention.

Attention—attention is a precious commodity. For I suspect that during the week you have been troubled by someone's *lack* of attention toward you or toward someone he should have been paying attention to. In other words, there's a lot of distraction in these last days. *\[Illustration]*  Suppose you're at the checkout at the dollar store. You don't want the cashier on his or her phone while he's scanning your items. Attention is precious, and it's important for us.

Attention is a precious commodity and Satan is the master of distraction—turning *our* attention away from the kingdom of heaven. Today is a good day to be reminded by our Lord Jesus *not* to be distracted. Right off the bat, let us be reminded not to be distracted by worry. Does our Lord not tell us,
> **Consider the lilies, how they grow: they neither toil nor spin, yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these. But if God so clothes the grass, which is alive in the field today, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, how much more will he clothe** ***you*, O you of little faith! And do not seek what you are to eat and what you are to drink,** ***nor be worried*. For all the nations of the world seek after these things, and your Father knows that you need them. Instead,** ***seek his kingdom*, and these things will be added to you.**  (Luke 12:27–31)?

We need not be distracted—we need not worry about food, drink, and clothing. And God forbid that we grumble Israelites once did in the wilderness! **"Seek first His kingdom, and all these things will be added to you."**

*\[Transition]*  What does this mean, to seek His kingdom? To seek God's kingdom is to seek *Christ's* kingdom, for He is *the* King, as the prophet foretold:
> **Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion! Shout aloud, O daughter of Jerusalem! Behold,** ***your king*** **is coming to you; righteous and having salvation is He, humble and mounted on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.**  (Zech. 9:9)

We are directed in these distracted days to Christ's kingdom as our laser focus—nothing else matters other than Christ's kingdom. The testimony of Scripture is that **Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief** (1 Tim. 1:15b KJV)—**for I decided to know nothing among you except Jesus Christ and Him crucified** (1 Cor. 2:2) for me, bearing my sins away as far as the east is from the west (Ps. 103:12). What does this mean, to seek His kingdom? Christ gathers repentant sinners like you and like me into His kingdom by Baptism in His name. He *\[font]*  washed my sins away and gave me His Spirit (Acts 2:38) and now He is my King. You and I, confessing our sins to God, are to seek His washing. And if we have already been washed once, we rejoice that our King has made us His own and, by the grace of the Spirit, we seek His help to sin no more (John 8:11), to live as righteous citizens in His kingdom.

Christ is our King and *our Lord*. *\[Direct attention to "Catechism for Sarah." This is a quote from Luther's Large Catechism.]*
> I believe that Jesus Christ, God's true Son, has become my Lord.
>
> But what does it mean to become Lord?
>
> It is this. He has redeemed me from sin, from the devil, from death, and from all evil. For before I did not have a Lord or King, but was captive under the devil's power, condemned to death, stuck in sin and blindness (Ephesians 2:1–3).

The devil is out; Christ is our Lord. He is our Savior who has rescued us from the devil and from sin and death. As we trust in Him, and Him alone, to save us, we are made citizens of His kingdom. Our faith in Jesus grants us heavenly citizenship! Belovèd in the Lord, we are *safely* in the kingdom of heaven now. We are safe from all harm, and even from worry about what we are to eat or wear.

Now as He is our Lord, we also *listen to Him* without distraction. We are directed at the Mount of Transfiguration by the Father, **"This is my beloved Son;** ***listen to Him*"**  (Mark 9:7b). We are given the Holy Spirit to live in our hearts. **"The Helper, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things** ***and bring to your remembrance all that I have said to you*"**  (John 14:26). And finally, hear the voice of our Lord and our Good Shepherd:
> **My sheep hear My voice, and I know them, and they follow Me. I give them eternal life, and they will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of My hand.**  (John 10:27–28)

The problem is that there is so much to distract us. But, belovèd in the Lord, hear especially these words from today's Holy Gospel: **"Heaven and earth will pass away, but My words will not pass away."**  There—we have been given that one thing that *cannot be shaken*. Food, drink, clothing, family can be and are shaken. Nations are shaken. Heaven and earth are shaken and are passing away. *But not Christ's Word—never can Christ's Word fail us.*

He is our Lord and we have nothing else by which to order our lives that His Word. He has saved us from our sins and ascended into heaven. He has promised to return to judge the living and the dead. When? When will He return so that we can make sure to be well-prepared, doing His good and gracious will? No one knows. For He tells us,
> **Concerning that day or that hour, no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father. Be on guard, keep awake. For you do not know when the time will come. It is like a man going on a journey, when he leaves home and puts his servants in charge,** ***each with his work*, and commands the doorkeeper to stay awake. Therefore stay awake—for you do not know when the master of the house will come, in the evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or in the morning—lest he come suddenly and find you asleep. And what I say to you I say to all:** ***Stay awake*.**

Not that I know that our Lord returns tonight, but I will never say that He isn't. We are directed by His Word that **"THE SON OF MAN IS NEAR, AT THE VERY GATES."**  He expects to find us doing what He has given us to do—awake and working.

What are we to do? What are we to be doing on the day of His return? Believe in Him, and then listen and do. In conclusion we can listen to what He tells us in a parallel passage in Matthew's Gospel.
> **When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the angels with him, then he will sit on his glorious throne. Before him will be gathered all the nations, and he will separate people one from another as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats. And he will place the sheep on his right, but the goats on the left.**  (Matt. 25:31–33)

We do well to remember the sheep and the goats and be the sheep hearing His voice.
> **For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me. Then the righteous will answer him, saying, "Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you, or thirsty and give you drink?" … Truly, I say to you, as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to Me.**  (Matt. 25:35–37, 40)

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep \[our] hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Matthew 25:35–36
\[35] For I was hungry and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you welcomed me, \[36] I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to me.’ (ESV)

Luke 12:32–34
\[32] “Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the kingdom. \[33] Sell your possessions, and give to the needy. Provide yourselves with moneybags that do not grow old, with a treasure in the heavens that does not fail, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys. \[34] For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. (ESV)