---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: November 23, 2025
title: THE BEGINNING OF THE END
occasion: Last Sunday of the Church Year
readings:
  - Mal. 3:13-18
  - Col. 1:13-20
  - Luke 23:27-43
sermon_text: Luke 23:27-43
bible_version: ESV
---

# THE BEGINNING OF THE END

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Let us ever remember why the thief on the cross, who believed in Jesus, was saved. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today's Holy Gospel is no mistake — we would normally hear our reading from Luke, chapter 23 during Holy Week — in fact, it was our Holy Gospel last Palm Sunday, the Sunday of Holy Week, and now we hear it yet again. Let us consider then how this reading may strike us differently today, on the Last Sunday of the Church Year, than it would on Palm Sunday.

Last Palm Sunday I remarked that in church language, *passion* means *suffering*. Why read Christ's Passion on Palm Sunday? Because Christ's Passion is so important for us to hear, and as many Christians miss Good Friday services anyway, read it on Palm Sunday. Well, Christ's Passion is so important for us to hear, read it on the Last Sunday of the Church Year as well. But this time these words will have a different impact, for the Last Sunday of the Church Year is the Sunday to preach about the end times — about the *return* of Jesus Christ to judge the living and the dead. He came once and He's coming again — it happened once and it will happen again. In this light, we see Christ's Passion as THE BEGINNING OF THE END.

Repetition — let us keep our ears open to the prophets and our eyes open to the repetition in that which has been prophesied. Our Lord Jesus Christ Himself is a Prophet — we are taught that He's Prophet, Priest, and King — and we heard our Lord prophesy last week of the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem — a prophecy that was fulfilled by the Roman army in 70 A.D. On that note we hear Christ prophesy at the beginning of today's Holy Gospel.
> **Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for Me, but weep for yourselves and for your children. For behold, the days are coming when they will say, "Blessed are the barren and the wombs that never bore and the breasts that never nursed!" Then they will begin to say to the mountains, "Fall on us," and to the hills, "Cover us."**

What does this sound like to you? "It sounds like the destruction of the temple in 70 A.D." "No, but it sounds like the end times." The repetition of what has been prophesied alerts us — it happened once and it will happen again — "It's not one — it's not the other — it can be both — it happened once and it will happen again."

We have a prophetic example from the prophet Malachi — from chapter 4, last week's lesson and the final chapter of the Old Testament. **"Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and awesome day of the LORD comes"**  (Mal. 4:5). Elijah came once in the days of King Ahab and he came again as John the Baptist (Matt. 11:13–14) — it happened once and it will happen again.

Let us then keep prophetic repetition in mind and hear this riddle from our Lord in today's Holy Gospel. After He laments for the daughters of Jerusalem, He says, **"For if they do these things when the wood is green, what will happen when it is dry?"**  I do not know of a consensus on the interpretation of this verse, but I will offer an interpretation in the spirit of prophetic repetition. Jesus is the green wood being broken, and green wood, we all know, isn't dry — it is not dead, it's living wood. Christ's Passion is those under Satan's influence trying their damndest to snap the green branch — Christ bends, He even dies. *\[Crucifixion]*  Christ's Passion and death on the Cross bearing our sins is the bending of the green wood. We can even say that the green wood snaps at the death of Christ. Be that as it may, *\[Resurrection]*  Christ's Resurrection proves that the green wood still lives — Alleluia! — death cannot destroy the green branch and Satan is defeated.

And, belovèd in the Lord, our Holy Gospel adds this: at the Crucifixion there is not one Cross but *\[Crucifixion]* three crosses.
> **Two others, who were criminals, were led away to be put to death with \[Jesus]. And when they came to the place that is called The Skull, there they crucified Him, and the criminals, one on His right and one on His left.**

The green branch is bent; He is the Cross in the middle. However there are two other branches — the sinner on the right and the sinner on the left — dead branches who will break and die forever. Now hear our Lord speak with one of them, but not before this sinner, this dying branch, hears our Lord pray to His Father, **"Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do."**  One of the two sinners is thinking, "He's praying for me!" Hearing this prayer the sinner on the right — we don't know whether he's on the right or the left, but tradition puts him on the right — the sinner on the right lifts up his head and says,
> **"Jesus, remember me when you come into Your kingdom." And \[Jesus] \[says] to him, "Truly, I say to you, today you will be with Me in paradise."**

By faith in Christ, the dead branch is now a green branch, thanks be to God! How much time does the thief on the right have to improve his record? None. *But he believes*, and by believing alone he is now a green branch, ready to live and bear much fruit. Tragically, the dead branch who mocks Christ dies forever.

Belovèd in the Lord, this is all seen at the Cross, but with prophetic repetition we recognize THE BEGINNING OF THE END. For all who believe in Christ will live with Him in Paradise, beginning with the thief on the right, but all who do not believe will be broken and perish, beginning with the thief on the left. It will be as true on the day of Christ's return as it was on the day of His Crucifixion — it happened once and it will happen again.

Belovèd in the Lord, we have, and always will have, the Word of Christ's forgiveness. **"HEAVEN AND EARTH WILL PASS AWAY, but My Words will not pass away"**  (Luke 21:33). And by clinging to His Word in our hearts, we are, and always will be the green, living branch, who on the day of Christ's return, will be judged righteous and live. **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
> **Now is the judgment of this world; now will the ruler of this world be cast out. And I, when I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to Myself.**  (John 12:31–32)



\[7] Nevertheless, I tell you the truth: it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Helper will not come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you. \[8] And when he comes, he will convict the world concerning sin and righteousness and judgment: \[9] concerning sin, because they do not believe in me; \[10] concerning righteousness, because I go to the Father, and you will see me no longer; \[11] concerning judgment, because the ruler of this world is judged. (John 16:7–11)