---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 16, 2025
title: O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Jer. 26:8-15
  - Phil. 3:17-4:1
  - Luke 13:31-35
sermon_text: Luke 13:31-35
bible_version: ESV
---

# O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, Jerusalem, in case you did not know it, Jerusalem is an important city, an *extremely* important city, perhaps the most important city in the world. We will never stop hearing of Jerusalem in the news and we will certainly never stop hearing of Jerusalem in the Bible.

Our life in the world to come is even described as *New Jerusalem*. This we are told in Revelation, chapter 21, where St. John writes,
> **I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea was no more. And I saw the holy city,**  ***new Jerusalem*, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.**  (Rev. 21:1–2)

And so, *New* Jerusalem is a heavenly depiction of the bride of Christ, His belovèd Church. This heavenly view of Jerusalem has also given us a well-known hymn, *Jerusalem the Golden*. This one you may have heard before: *\[sing]*
> *Jerusalem the golden, |* 
> *With milk and honey blest— |* 
> *The promise of salvation, |* 
> *The place of peace and rest*

Whenever we hear *Jerusalem*, our ears should perk up *\[humor]*  (not like when we hear *Pittsburgh*.) And we hear *Jerusalem* again in today's Holy Gospel: **"For it cannot be that a prophet should perish away from Jerusalem,"**  says our Lord Jesus Christ. This implies that the LORD's true prophets have indeed died or been put to death in Jerusalem. This is not a heavenly view of Jerusalem at all—far from it. Jerusalem is the place where evil has happened, where idolaters have persecuted and killed the prophets of the One True God of Israel. And it raises the question: who are these prophets who have perished in Jerusalem?

The Bible, interestingly, is not big on details describing the death of specific prophets in Jerusalem. We do have, however, the sermon in the book of Acts preached by the deacon Stephen, who is about to be stoned in Jerusalem with Saul, soon to be St. Paul, a witness *approving* of Stephen's death. Stephen declares,
> **Which of the prophets did your fathers** ***not*** **persecute? And they killed those who announced beforehand the coming of the Righteous One, whom you have now betrayed and murdered.**  (Acts 7:52)

Stephen is in the line of the prophets who have been murdered—some, maybe many, maybe most, murdered in Jerusalem. We don't have much specific information on specific prophets, but we do have a corroborating passage in Hebrews, chapter 11:
> **Some were tortured, refusing to accept release, so that they might rise again to a better life. Others suffered mocking and flogging, and even chains and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn in two, they were killed with the sword.**  (Heb. 11:35b–37a)

Tradition, not the Bible, has it that the prophet Isaiah was sawn in two, but we are not sure about that. What we *are* sure of, however, is that the first Christian martyr, Stephen, was stoned at Jerusalem, as foretold by our Lord in today's Holy Gospel.
> ***O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM*, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and you were not willing!**

***O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM***—belovèd in the Lord, remember these words—***O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM*** is not only a reference to the holy city but it is Biblical shorthand for the sad history of God's prophets being put to death there. ***O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM*** is also shorthand for what our Lord Jesus says next: **"How often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings,**  ***and you were not willing*!"**  Elsewhere, in Revelation, our Lord also says,
> **Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him and eat with him, and he with me.**  (Rev. 3:20)

Let us take these passages together—knocking at the door and the hen gathering her brood under her wings—these are both from the lips of Christ Himself. We see that He can first teach one way, and then another, but the truth remains the same.

*\[Illustration]*  We have Christ standing at the door of our hearts and knocking. *\[Knock-knock-knock]*  "Is anyone home?" When we are literally at home and someone does knock at the door, do we open the door every time? Better not! It could be a criminal. On the other hand, it could be someone selling Internet service or gas service. Even then, we may not *want* to open the door. This is something with which we are familiar: "I really don't want to talk to this person right now," and we do not answer the door. But if it is *Christ* knocking at the door, we do well to open the door and let Him in.

*How do we know* if it's Christ or the devil knocking at the door? How do we know if it's Christ or the devil trying to gather us under his wings? That can be tricky, for the devil does His best to dress up as Christ. ′nd if you don't believe me, believe Christ Himself:
> **For false christs and false prophets will arise and perform great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the elect. See, I have told you beforehand.**  (Matt. 24:24–25)

Belovèd in the Lord, how are we to be wise to know whether it is the true Christ who wants us to open the door?

There is another passage from the Bible that teaches us recognizing Christ is a problem for us. From 1 Corinthians, chapter 2: **"The natural man does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are folly to him, and he is** ***not able*** **to understand them because they are spiritually discerned"**  (1 Cor. 2:14). We cannot on our own even understand that it is Christ knocking at the door, for our own hearts are deceitful above all things (Jer. 17:9). Here we learn that when Christ knocks at the door—when Christ tries to gather us under His wings, the Holy Spirit is active inviting us in, getting us to trust—helping us to recognize that this is indeed the true Christ and that we will be safe under His wings—that this is indeed the true Christ and we should open the door and let him in. Left on our own we keep the door of our hearts shut—we harden our hearts—but, thanks be to God, this is where we say, "By the grace of the Spirit."

By the grace of the Spirit are we able to discern Christ from the devil. By the grace of the Spirit are we given ears that are even *able* to listen to Christ. By the grace of the Spirit we are called to to Jesus *by the Gospel*. Belovèd in the Lord, here is *where* we know the Spirit's *always* at work: the Spirit's always at work wherever forgiveness of sins is proclaimed in in the name of Jesus. Belovèd in the Lord, there is a message for the whole world, to be proclaimed in English, in Chinese, and in Tamil:
> **I have been crucified with Christ. It is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me. And the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God,** ***who loved me and gave Himself for me*.**  (Gal. 2:20)
>
> *\[Crucifixion]*  **\[For] He was pierced for our transgressions; He was crushed for our iniquities; upon Him was the chastisement that brought us peace, and with His wounds we are healed. All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned—every one—to his own way; and the LORD has laid on Him the iniquity of us all.**  (Is. 53:5–6)

It is with this Gospel message, and only with this message of Good News, and only in the name of Jesus that the Holy Spirit is present, and we are able to listen and be gathered under Christ's wings. Under His wings we have His full forgiveness, under His wings He lives in our hearts, under His wings we have a home in heaven.

***O JERUSALEM, JERUSALEM*** for those who harden their hearts and will not listen. But the heavenly Jerusalem for us who heed the Spirit and open the door for Jesus to enter in.

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Jeremiah 25:3–7
\[3] “For twenty-three years, from the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, to this day, the word of the LORD has come to me, and I have spoken persistently to you, but you have not listened. \[4] You have neither listened nor inclined your ears to hear, although the LORD persistently sent to you all his servants the prophets, \[5] saying, ‘Turn now, every one of you, from his evil way and evil deeds, and dwell upon the land that the LORD has given to you and your fathers from of old and forever. \[6] Do not go after other gods to serve and worship them, or provoke me to anger with the work of your hands. Then I will do you no harm.’ \[7] Yet you have not listened to me, declares the LORD, that you might provoke me to anger with the work of your hands to your own harm. (ESV)

*Sedes doctrinae*. We believe that there is such a thing.