---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: March 1, 2026
title: HE WHO KEEPS YOU WILL NOT SLUMBER
occasion: 2nd Sunday in Lent
readings:
  - Gen. 12:1-9
  - Ps. 121
  - Rom. 4:1-8, 13-17
  - John 3:1-17
sermon_text: Ps. 121
bible_version: ESV
---

# HE WHO KEEPS YOU WILL NOT SLUMBER

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  We believe in You, Lord Jesus, even as we sleep. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today's psalm is **"I lift up my eyes to the hills."**  No doubt many of you are familiar with it.
> **I lift up my eyes to the hills. From where does my help come? My help comes from the LORD, who made heaven and earth. He will not let your foot be moved; HE WHO KEEPS YOU WILL NOT SLUMBER. Behold, he who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.**

And so, this psalm tells us that God is constantly keeping watch over us — He stays up all night watching over us while we sleep. When I visit you in the hospital or at a care facility chances are high that we will pray this psalm together.

In addition to the psalm we also have a wonderful Old Testament lesson today and it is *foundational*. We have the call of Abraham recorded in Genesis, chapter 12.
> **The LORD said to Abram**\[, who had not yet been given the name Ab-ra-ham] **, "Go from your country and your kindred and your father's house to the land that I will show you. And I will make of you a great nation, and I will bless you and make your name great, so that you will be a blessing. I will bless those who bless you, and him who dishonors you I will curse, and** ***in you all the families of the earth shall be blessed*."**  (Gen. 12:1–3)

We are told that at the time Abraham first hears this promise he is seventy-five years young. Abraham is the answer to every elderly person's question, "Why does the Lord still have me on this earth?"

"Be patient. In twenty-five years you will be a first-time father and your wife, Sarah, will be a first-time mother. Did I not just tell you, **'I will make of you a great nation'?** " It turns out that the course of history has followed God's promise to an old man — take note that Abraham *gets started* when he is seventy-five years old. *\[Virginia]*  Virginia, I cannot wait to see what the Lord has in store for you.

We first hear God's promise to Abraham in Genesis, chapter 12 — early in the Bible. I would say that this is the first time since the Garden of Eden that we hear God flat-out promise to send His Son to save us. For He promises to Abraham, **"In you all the families of the earth shall be blessed,"**  namely, " **In you all the families of the earth shall be blessed** by the coming of the Savior Jesus Christ." This is Good News for all the families of the earth, and did I not say that the course of history has followed God's promise to Abraham? This is the first time in the Bible that we hear the promise put this way and we will hear it repeated to Isaac in Genesis, chapter 26 (26:4), and we will hear it repeated to Jacob in Genesis, chapter 28 (23:14) and it will be fulfilled with the appearing of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

Christ came and *\[Crucifixion]*  bore our sins on the Cross and *\[Resurrection]*  was raised for our justification (Rom. 4:25), to which the apostles testify. In the New Testament the apostle Paul still picks up on God's promise to Abraham in his letter to the Galatians:
> **Know then that it is those of faith who are the sons of Abraham. And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the Gospel beforehand to Abraham, saying,** ***"In you shall all the nations be blessed."***  **So then, those who are of faith are blessed along with Abraham, the man of faith.**  (Gal. 3:7–9)

Foundational — God's promise to Abraham is foundational to all of Scripture because He promises Christ, the cornerstone of the Church (Ps. 118:22) by which all men are saved, the Jew first, but also the Gentile.

Belovèd in the Lord, what I want you to *not let go of* is this: Abraham is but an *old* man when he hears this promise. *\[Ask]*  Would Abraham have done better if he were a *young* man when he heard this promise? … No, not at all. But young man have more ability than an old man. It does not matter.
Belovèd in the Lord, we do well to go over carefully what is foundational to our faith, and we learn it from Abraham:
1. God's promise and
2. our faith.

It does not matter if we're old. It does not matter if we're sick. It does not matter even if we're asleep. **HE WHO KEEPS YOU WILL NOT SLUMBER.**  What matters is that **"\[Abraham] believed the LORD, and He counted it to him as righteousness"**  (Gen. 15:6). If we go to sleep for the night believing in the Lord, everything is still done. **"Behold, He who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep."**  Again, St. Paul cannot stop bringing it up, this time in today's Epistle from Romans, chapter 4:
> **For if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not before God. For what does the Scripture say? "Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness." Now to the one who works, his wages are not counted as a gift but as his due. And to the one who does** ***not work*** **but** ***believes*** **in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted as righteousness.**  (Rom. 4:2–5)

Abraham was old. When we are old He keeps His promise. When we are sick He keeps His promise. Even when we are sleeping He keeps His promise to care for us through faith in His Son who has saved us. **"For God so loved the world, that he gave his only Son, that** ***whoever believes in Him*** **should not perish but have eternal life"**  (John 3:16). **The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes