---
author: Peeter Pirn
date: January 18, 2026
title: ON HIM ALONE WE BUILD
occasion: The Confession of St. Peter
readings:
  - Acts 4:8-13
  - Ps. 118:19-29
  - 2 Pet. 1:1-15
  - Mark 8:27-9:1
sermon_text: Ps. 118:19-29
bible_version: ESV
---

# ON HIM ALONE WE BUILD

Let us pray. *\[Prayer]*  Help us heavenly Father, to confess our faith in Jesus as Peter did. Amen.

Belovèd in the Lord, today is the Feast of *the Confession* of St. Peter, and it's time to review what it means to *confess*. Is today's day marked for us to remember Peter *confessing* … that he had denied Christ three times (John 18:17, 25, 27)? Is today marked as the day to remember when Peter confessed his sin? This would be the same kind of confessing that we heard about last week when John the Baptist was baptizing sinners: **"Then Jerusalem and all Judea and all the region about the Jordan were going out to \[John the Baptist], and they were baptized by him in the river Jordan,** ***confessing their sins*"**  (Matt. 3:5–6). Confessing our sins — this is *but one* of the meanings of *confess* — to tell God, "I confess that I have sinned against You by breaking this particular Commandment."

Last week I brought up the Second Commandment, so, going in order, today I'll bring up the Third:
> **"Remember the Sabbath day by keeping it holy."**  What does this mean? We should fear and love God so that we do not despise preaching and His Word, but hold it sacred and gladly hear and learn it.

And as for Peter's sin of denying Christ, he was likely breaking the Second Commandment because he swore falsely: **"\[Peter] began to invoke a curse on himself and to swear, 'I do not know this man of whom you speak' "**  (Mark 14:71). What is implied but not explicitly stated is that Peter brought in God's Name when he swore and cursed that he did not know Jesus. For to bring in God's name for falsehood of any kind is to sin against the Second Commandment, which we heard last week: **"You shall not misuse the name of the Lord your God."**  Furthermore, we are warned by our Lord in today's Holy Gospel, **"Whoever is ashamed of Me and of My words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him will the Son of Man also be ashamed when He comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels"**  (Mark 8:38). That is what Peter's sin deserved.

So up to this point I have only brought up *one* of the meanings of *confess*: to confess our sins, *\[irony]*  bringing up St. Peter as our shining example. There is a *second* meaning of *confess*, and to illustrate this second meaning of *confess* let us remember what John the Baptist said about himself: **"He** ***confessed*, and did not deny, but** ***confessed*, 'I am not the Christ' "**  (John 1:20). By this statement John is in no way confessing a sin: he is simply stating that Jesus is the Christ and he is not — this is most certainly true. *This is most certainly true* and *confess* go together — the second meaning of *confess* is actually something wonderful: it is to state with our lips what we *know* to be true.

In today's Holy Gospel, Peter confesses about Jesus, **"You are the Christ"**  (Mark 8:29b). It is for this confession — not for a confession of sin but for a confession of the truth — that we observe the Feast of the Confession of St. Peter. Jesus is the Christ foretold in the Old Testament — Immanuel, God With Us — foretold by the prophets, the Messiah who would save His people from their sins. This is most certainly true; this is the confession of St. Peter.

Now, there is a delicate distinction to be made here. There is a difference between what we *feel* to be true and what we *know* to be true. Truth is precious, after all, and with the devil constantly spreading lies (John 8:44) we hunger and thirst for what we *know* to be true. *\[Illustration]*  Let me give you an example. Last week I washed Russ with water three times, saying, "Russ, I baptize you in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit." Someone could have witnessed Russ's Baptism and said, "That was a nice day for Russ. He went to church and got baptized and everyone was happy." I feel that that was the case last week. But who am I to say that someone else at church last week felt another way?

Now here's the distinction. When I said, "Russ, I baptize you in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit," I did not come up with it myself. For Christ Himself has given the command: **"Therefore go and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit"**  (Matt. 28:19). Christ's Word *makes it* most certainly true — Christ's Word is something to confess, not just feel. If it had not been Russ that Christ baptized last Sunday but a bawling baby, the baby's bad feelings for being made wet *would in no way* have contradicts Christ's command. Even if the baby were crying and his parents were embarrassed, that would in no way change that the Father's good and gracious will had been performed for that child in the name of His Son, Jesus Christ. Confessing means that it's true no matter how we feel.

Furthermore, let us not stop at Christ's command but let us continue with Christ's promise which is also a matter of confession — this is most certainly true. For our Lord sent out St. Peter to confess, as is recorded in 1 Peter, chapter 3:
> *\[Crucifixion]*  **Christ also suffered once for sins, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit, in which he went and proclaimed to the spirits in prison, because they formerly did not obey, when God’s patience waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was being prepared, in which a few, that is, eight persons, were brought safely through water.** *\[Font]*  ***Baptism, which corresponds to this, now saves you*, not as a removal of dirt from the body but as an appeal to God for a good conscience, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ.**  (1 Pet. 3:18–21)

In the middle of Peter confessing about Christ's Crucifixion and our Baptism, we hear this and confess it to be true: " **Baptism, … now saves you,"**  no matter how you feel after you've sinned and confessed your sin to God. Christ's Word must stand (Matt. 24:35), and the devil cannot take away what is true of our Baptism. We hold Christ's promises sacred. We hold Christ's command sacred. The devil and the world say, "No way." But Christ has said it and it is most certainly true.
> **The stone that the builders rejected has become the cornerstone. This is the LORD's doing; it is marvelous in our eyes.**

**The peace of God, which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus** (Phil. 4:7). Amen.

## Sermon theme
One carefully worded sentence (ALL CAPS) that will permeate every sentence of the sermon—creates mental matrix.
## Outline
### I.
#### A.
##### 1.
##### 2.
#### B.
### II.
## Notes
Matthew 19:26–30
\[26] But Jesus looked at them and said, “With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.” \[27] Then Peter said in reply, “See, we have left everything and followed you. What then will we have?” \[28] Jesus said to them, “Truly, I say to you, in the new world, when the Son of Man will sit on his glorious throne, you who have followed me will also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. \[29] And everyone who has left houses or brothers or sisters or father or mother or children or lands, for my name’s sake, will receive a hundredfold and will inherit eternal life. \[30] But many who are first will be last, and the last first. (ESV)